THE IMPULSE TO POWERBetween man and other animals there are various differences,some intellectual, some emotional. One of the chief emotionaldifferences is that some human desires, unlike those of animals,are essentially boundless and incapable of complete satisfaction.The boa constrictor, when he has had his meal, sleeps untilappetite revives; if other animals do not do likewise, it is becausetheir meals are less adequate or because they fear enemies. Theactivities of animals, with few exceptions, are inspired by theprimary needs of survival and reproduction, and do not exceedwhat these needs make imperative.With men, the matter is different. A large proportion of thehuman race, it is true, is obliged to work so hard in obtainingnecessaries that little energy is left over for other purposes; butthose whose livelihood is assured do not, on that account, ceaseto be active. Xerxes had no lack of food or raiment or wives atthe time when he embarked upon the Athenian expedition.Newton was certain of material comfort from the moment whenhe became a Fellow of Trinity, but it was after this that he wrotethe Principia. St Francis and Ignatius Loyola had no need to foundOrders to escape from want. These were eminent men, but thesame characteristic, in varying degrees, is to be found in all but asmall exceptionally sluggish minority. Mrs A, who is quite sureof her husband’s success in business, and has no fear of theworkhouse, likes to be better dressed than Mrs B, although shecould escape the danger of pneumonia at much less expense.Both she and Mr A are pleased if he is knighted or elected toParliament. In day-dreams there is no limit to imagined triumphs,and if they are regarded as possible, efforts will be madeto achieve them.Imagination is the goad that forces human beings intorestless exertion after their primary needs have been satisfied.Most of us have known very few moments when we couldhave said:If it were now to die,’Twere now to be most happy, for I fearMy soul hath her content so absoluteThat not another comfort like to thisSucceeds in unknown fate.And in our rare moments of perfect happiness, it is natural, likeOthello, to wish for death, since we know that contentmentcannot last. What we need for lasting happiness is impossible forhuman beings: only God can have complete bliss, for His is ‘thekingdom and the power and the glory’. Earthly kingdoms arelimited by other kingdoms; earthly power is cut short by death;earthly glory, though we build pyramids or be ‘married toimmortal verse’, fades with the passing of centuries. To thosewho have but little of power and glory, it may seem that a littlemore would satisfy them, but in this they are mistaken: thesedesires are insatiable and infinite, and only in the infinitude ofGod could they find repose.2 the impulse to powerWhile animals are content with existence and reproduction,men desire also to expand, and their desires in this respect arelimited only by what imagination suggests as possible. Everyman would like to be God, if it were possible; some few find itdifficult to admit the impossibility. These are the men framedafter the model of Milton’s Satan, combining, like him, nobilitywith impiety. By ‘impiety’ I mean something not dependentupon theological beliefs: I mean refusal to admit the limitationsof individual human power. This Titanic combination of nobilitywith impiety is most notable in the great conquerors, but someelement of it is to be found in all men. It is this that makes socialcooperation difficult, for each of us would like to conceive ofit after the pattern of the cooperation between God and Hisworshippers, with ourself in the place of God. Hence competition,the need of compromise and government, the impulse torebellion, with instability and periodic violence. And hence theneed of morality to restrain anarchic self-assertion.Of the infinite desires of man, the chief are the desires forpower and glory. These are not identical, though closely allied:the Prime Minister has more power than glory, the King hasmore glory than power. As a rule, however, the easiest way toobtain glory is to obtain power; this is especially the case asregards the men who are active in relation to public events. Thedesire for glory, therefore, prompts, in the main, the sameactions as are prompted by the desire for power, and the twomotives may, for most practical purposes, be regarded as one.The orthodox economists, as well as Marx, who in this respectagreed with them, were mistaken in supposing that economicself-interest could be taken as the fundamental motive in thesocial sciences. The desire for commodities, when separatedfrom power and glory, is finite, and can be fully satisfied by amoderate competence. The really expensive desires are not dictatedby a love of material comfort. Such commodities as a legislaturerendered subservient by corruption, or a private picturethe impulse to power 3gallery of Old Masters selected by experts, are sought for the sakeof power or glory, not as affording comfortable places in whichto sit. When a moderate degree of comfort is assured, bothindividuals and communities will pursue power rather thanwealth: they may seek wealth as a means to power, or they mayforgo an increase of wealth in order to secure an increase ofpower, but in the former case as in the latter their fundamentalmotive is not economic.This error in orthodox and Marxist economics is not merelytheoretical, but is of the greatest practical importance, and hascaused some of the principal events of recent times to be misunderstood.It is only by realising that love of power is the causeof the activities that are important in social affairs that history,whether ancient or modern, can be rightly interpreted.In the course of this book I shall be concerned to prove thatthe fundamental concept in social science is Power, in the samesense in which Energy is the fundamental concept in physics.Like energy, power has many forms, such as wealth, armaments,civil authority, influence on opinion. No one of these can beregarded as subordinate to any other, and there is no one formfrom which the others are derivative. The attempt to treat oneform of power, say wealth, in isolation, can only be partiallysuccessful, just as the study of one form of energy will be defectiveat certain points, unless other forms are taken into account.Wealth may result from military power or from influence overopinion, just as either of these may result from wealth. The lawsof social dynamics are laws which can only be stated in terms ofpower, not in terms of this or that form of power. In formertimes, military power was isolated, with the consequence thatvictory or defeat appeared to depend upon the accidental qualitiesof commanders. In our day, it is common to treat economicpower as the source from which all other kinds are derived; this,I shall contend, is just as great an error as that of the purelymilitary historians whom it has caused to seem out of date.4 the impulse to powerAgain, there are those who regard propaganda as the fundamentalform of power. This is by no means a new opinion; it isembodied in such traditional sayings as magna est veritas et prevalebitand ‘the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church’. It hasabout the same measure of truth and falsehood as the militaryview or the economic view. Propaganda, if it can create an almostunanimous opinion, can generate an irresistible power; butthose who have military or economic control can, if they choose,use it for the purpose of propaganda. To revert to the analogy ofphysics: power, like energy, must be regarded as continuallypassing from any one of its forms into any other, and it shouldbe the business of social science to seek the laws of such transformations.The attempt to isolate any one form of power, moreespecially, in our day, the economic form, has been, and still is, asource of errors of great practical importance.There are many ways in which different societies differ in relationto power. They differ, to begin with, in the degree of powerpossessed by individuals or organisations; it is obvious, forexample, that, owing to increase of organisation, the State hasmore power now than in former times. They differ, again, asregards the kind of organisation that is most influential: a militarydespotism, a theocracy, a plutocracy, are very dissimilar types.They differ, thirdly, through diversity in the ways of acquiringpower: hereditary kingship produces one kind of eminent man,the qualities required of a great ecclesiastic produce another kind,democracy produces a third kind, and war a fourth.Where no social institution, such as aristocracy or hereditarymonarchy, exists to limit the number of men to whom power ispossible, those who most desire power are, broadly speaking,those most likely to acquire it. It follows that, in a social systemin which power is open to all, the posts which confer powerwill, as a rule, be occupied by men who differ from the averagein being exceptionally power-loving. Love of power, though oneof the strongest of human motives, is very unevenly distributed,the impulse to power 5and is limited by various other motives, such as love of ease, loveof pleasure, and sometimes love of approval. It is disguised,among the more timid, as an impulse of submission to leadership,which increases the scope of the power-impulses of boldmen. Those whose love of power is not strong are unlikely tohave much influence on the course of events. The men whocause social changes are, as a rule, men who strongly desire to doso. Love of power, therefore, is a characteristic of the men whoare causally important. We should, of course, be mistaken if weregarded it as the sole human motive, but this mistake would notlead us so much astray as might be expected in the search forcausal laws in social science, since love of power is the chiefmotive producing the changes which social science has to study.The laws of social dynamics are—so I shall contend—onlycapable of being stated in terms of power in its various forms. Inorder to discover these laws, it is necessary first to classify theforms of power, and then to review various important historicalexamples of the ways in which organisations and individualshave acquired control over men’s lives.I shall have, throughout, the twofold purpose of suggestingwhat I believe to be a more adequate analysis of social changes ingeneral than that which has been taught by economists, and ofmaking the present and the probable near future more intelligiblethan it can be to those whose imaginations are dominatedby the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Those centurieswere in many ways exceptional, and we seem to be now returning,in a number of respects, to forms of life and thought whichwere prevalent in earlier ages. To understand our own time andits needs, history, both ancient and mediaeval, is indispensable,for only so can we arrive at a form of possible progress notunduly dominated by the axioms of the nineteenth century.6 the impulse to power2LEADERS AND FOLLOWERSThe power impulse has two forms: explicit, in leaders; implicit,in their followers. When men willingly follow a leader, they doso with a view to the acquisition of power by the group whichhe commands, and they feel that his triumphs are theirs. Mostmen do not feel in themselves the competence required for leadingtheir group to victory, and therefore seek out a captain whoappears to possess the courage and sagacity necessary for theachievement of supremacy. Even in religion this impulseappears. Nietzsche accused Christianity of inculcating a slavemorality,but ultimate triumph was always the goal. ‘Blessed arethe meek, for they shall inherit the earth.’ Or as a well-known hymnmore explicitly states it:The Son of God goes forth to war,A kingly crown to gain.His blood-red banner streams afar.Who follows in His train?Who best can drink his cup of woe,Triumphant over pain,Who patient bears his cross below,He follows in His train.If this is a slave-morality, then every soldier of fortune whoendures the rigours of a campaign, and every rank-and-file politicianwho works hard at electioneering, is to be accounted aslave. But in fact, in every genuinely cooperative enterprise, thefollower is psychologically no more a slave than the leader.It is this that makes endurable the inequalities of power whichorganisation makes inevitable, and which tend to increase ratherthan diminish as society grows more organic.Inequality in the distribution of power has always existed inhuman communities, as far back as our knowledge extends. Thisis due partly to external necessity, partly to causes which are tobe found in human nature. Most collective enterprises are onlypossible if they are directed by some governing body. If a houseis to be built, someone must decide on the plans; if the trains areto run on a railway, the timetable cannot be left to the capricesof engine-drivers; if a new road is to be constructed, someonemust decide where it is to go. Even a democratically electedgovernment is still a government, and therefore, on groundsthat have nothing to do with psychology, there must, if collectiveenterprises are to succeed, be some men who give ordersand others who obey them. But the fact that this is possible, andstill more the fact that the actual inequalities of power exceedwhat is made necessary by technical causes, can only beexplained in terms of individual psychology and physiology.Some men’s characters lead them always to command, othersalways to obey; between these extremes lie the mass of averagehuman beings, who like to command in some situations, but inothers prefer to be subject to a leader.Alder, in his book on Understanding Human Nature, distinguishes a8 leaders and followerssubmissive type and an imperious type. ‘The servile individual’,he says, ‘lives by the rules and laws of others, and this type seeksout a servile position almost compulsively.’ On the other hand,he continues, the imperious type, who asks: ‘How can I besuperior to everyone?’ is found whenever a director is needed,and rises to the top in revolutions. Adler regards both types asundesirable, at any rate in their extreme forms, and he considersboth as products of education. ‘The greatest disadvantage of anauthoritative education,’ he says, ‘lies in the fact that it gives thechild an ideal of power, and shows him the pleasures which areconnected with the possession of power.’ Authoritative education,we may add, produces the slave type as well as the despotictype, since it leads to the feeling that the only possible relationbetween two human beings who cooperate is that in which oneissues orders and the other obeys them.Love of power, in various limited forms, is almost universal,but in its absolute form it is rare. A woman who enjoys power inthe management of her house is likely to shrink from the sort ofpolitical power enjoyed by a Prime Minister; Abraham Lincoln,on the contrary, while not afraid to govern the United States,could not face civil war in the home. Perhaps Napoleon, if theBellerophon had suffered shipwreck, would have tamely obeyed theorders of British officers as to escaping in boats. Men like powerso long as they believe in their own competence to handle thebusiness in question, but when they know themselves incompetentthey prefer to follow a leader.The impulse of submission, which is just as real and just ascommon as the impulse to command, has its roots in fear. Themost unruly gang of children ever imagined will become completelyamenable to the orders of a competent adult in an alarmingsituation, such as a fire; when the War came, the Pankhurstsmade their peace with Lloyd George. Whenever there is acutedanger, the impulse of most people is to seek out Authority andsubmit to it; at such moments, few would dream of revolution.leaders and followers 9When war breaks out, people have similar feelings towards theGovernment.Organisations may not be designed for the purpose of meetingdangers. Economic organisations in some cases, such as coalmines, involve dangers, but these are incidental, and if they wereeliminated the organisations would flourish all the better. Ingeneral, meeting dangers is no part of the essential purpose ofeconomic organisations, or of governmental organisations concernedwith internal affairs. But lifeboats and fire-brigades, likearmies and navies, are constructed for the purpose of meetingdangers. In a certain less immediate sense, this is also true ofreligious bodies, which exist in part to allay the metaphysicalfears that are buried deep in our nature. If anyone feels inclinedto question this, let him think of such hymns as:Rock of Ages, cleft for me,Let me hide myself in thee;Jesu, lover of my soul,Let me to thy bosom fly,While the gathering waters roll,While the tempest still is high.In submission to the Divine Will there is a sense of ultimatesafety, which has led to religious abasement in many monarchswho could not submit to any merely earthly being. All submissivenessis rooted in fear, whether the leader to whom we submitbe human or divine.It has become a commonplace that aggressiveness also oftenhas its roots in fear. I am inclined to think that this theory hasbeen pushed too far. It is true of a certain kind of aggressiveness,for instance, that of D. H. Lawrence. But I greatly doubtwhether the men who become pirate chiefs are those who arefilled with retrospective terror of their fathers, or whether10 leaders and followersNapoleon, at Austerlitz, really felt that he was getting even withMadame Mère. I know nothing of the mother of Attila, butI rather suspect that she spoilt the little darling, who subsequentlyfound the world irritating because it sometimesresisted his whims. The type of aggressiveness that is the outcomeof timidity is not, I think, that which inspires greatleaders; the great leaders, I should say, have an exceptional selfconfidencewhich is not only on the surface, but penetratesdeep into the subconscious.The self-confidence necessary to a leader may be caused invarious ways. Historically, one of the commonest has been ahereditary position of command. Read, for example, thespeeches of Queen Elizabeth in moments of crisis: you will seethe monarch over-riding the woman, convincing her andthrough her the nation, that she knows what must be done, as nomere commoner can hope to do. In her case, the interests of thenation and the sovereign were in harmony; that is why she was‘Good Queen Bess’. She could even praise her father withoutarousing indignation. There is no doubt that the habit of commandmakes it easier to bear responsibilities and to take quickdecisions. A clan which follows its hereditary chief probablydoes better than if it chose its chief by lot. On the other hand, abody like the mediaeval church, which chose its chief onaccount of conspicuous merits, and usually after he had hadconsiderable experience of important administrative posts,secured, on the average, considerably better results than weresecured, in the same period, in hereditary monarchies.Some of the ablest leaders known to history have arisen inrevolutionary situations. Let us consider, for a moment, the qualitieswhich brought success to Cromwell, Napoleon, and Lenin.All three, in difficult times, dominated their respective countries,and secured the willing service of able men who were not bynature submissive. All three had boundless courage and selfconfidence,combined with what their colleagues consideredleaders and followers 11sound judgement at difficult moments. Of the three, however,Cromwell and Lenin belonged to one type, and Napoleon toanother. Cromwell and Lenin were men of profound religiousfaith, believing themselves to be the appointed ministers of anon-human purpose. Their power-impulses thus seemed tothemselves indubitably righteous, and they cared little for thoserewards of power—such as luxury and ease—which could notbe harmonised with their identification with the cosmic purpose.This is specially true of Lenin, for Cromwell, in his lastyears, was conscious of falling into sin. Nevertheless, in bothcases it was the combination of faith with great ability that gavethem courage, and enabled them to inspire their followers withconfidence in their leadership.Napoleon, as opposed to Cromwell and Lenin, is the supremeexample of the soldier of fortune. The Revolution suited him,since it made his opportunity, but otherwise he was indifferentto it. Though he gratified French patriotism and depended uponit, France, like the Revolution, was to him merely an opportunity;he had even, in his youth, toyed with the idea of fighting forCorsica against France. His success was due, not so much to anyexceptional qualities of character, as to his technical skill in war:when other men would have been defeated, he was victorious.At crucial moments, such as the 18 Brumaire and Marengo, hedepended upon others for success; but he had the spectaculargifts that enabled him to annex the achievements of his coadjutors.The French army was full of ambitious young men; it wasNapoleon’s cleverness, not his psychology, that gave him thepower to succeed where the others failed. His belief in his star,which finally led to his downfall, was the effect of his victories,not their cause.To come to our own day, Hitler must be classed, psychologically,with Cromwell and Lenin, Mussolini with Napoleon.The soldier of fortune, or pirate chief, is a type of moreimportance in history than is thought by ‘scientific’ historians.12 leaders and followersSometimes, like Napoleon, he succeeds in making himself thelender of bodies of men who have purposes that are in partimpersonal: the French revolutionary armies conceived of themselvesas the liberators of Europe, and were so regarded in Italy aswell as by many in Western Germany, but Napoleon himselfnever brought any more liberation than seemed useful for hisown career. Very often there is no pretence of impersonal aims.Alexander may have set to work to hellenise the East, but it isdoubtful whether his Macedonians were much interested in thisaspect of his campaigns. Roman generals, during the last hundredyears of the Republic, were mainly out for cash, andsecured their soldiers’ loyalty by distributions of land and treasure.Cecil Rhodes professed a mystical belief in the BritishEmpire, but the belief yielded good dividends, and the trooperswhom he engaged for the conquest of Matabeleland were offerednakedly pecuniary inducements. Organised greed, with little orno disguise, has played a very large part in the world’s wars.The ordinary quiet citizen, we said, is led largely by fear whenhe submits to a leader. But this can hardly be true of a gang ofpirates, unless no more peaceable profession was open to them.When once the leader’s authority is established, he may inspirefear in mutinous individuals; but until he is a leader, and isrecognised as such by the majority, he is not in a position toinspire fear. To acquire the position of leader, he must excel inthe qualities that confer authority: self-confidence, quick decision,and skill in deciding upon the right measures. Leadershipis relative: Caesar could make Antony obey him, but no oneelse could. Most people feel that politics is difficult, and that theyhad better follow a leader—they feel this instinctively andunconsciously, as dogs do with their masters. If this were not thecase, collective political action would scarcely be possible.Thus love of power, as a motive, is limited by timidity, whichalso limits the desire for self-direction. Since power enables us torealise more of our desires than would otherwise be possible,leaders and followers 13and since it secures deference from others, it is natural to desirepower except in so far as timidity interferes. This sort of timidity islessened by the habit of responsibility, and accordingly responsibilitiestend to increase the desire for power. Experience of crueltyand unfriendliness may operate in either direction: with thosewho are easily frightened it produces the wish to escape observation,while bolder spirits are stimulated to seek positions in whichthey can inflict cruelties rather than suffer them.After anarchy, the natural first step is despotism, becausethis is facilitated by the instinctive mechanisms of dominationand submission; this has been illustrated in the family, in theState, and in business. Equal cooperation is much more difficultthan despotism, and much less in line with instinct. Whenmen attempt equal cooperation, it is natural for each to strivefor complete mastery, since the submissive impulses are notbrought into play. It is almost necessary that all the parties concernedshould acknowledge a common loyalty to somethingoutside all of them. In China, family businesses often succeedbecause of Confucian loyalty to the family; but impersonal jointstockcompanies are apt to prove unworkable, because no onehas any compelling motive for honesty towards the other shareholders.Where there is government by deliberation, there must,for success, be a general respect for the law, or for the nation, orfor some principle which all parties respect. The Society ofFriends, when any doubtful matter has to be decided, do not takea vote and abide by the majority: they discuss until they arrive at‘the sense of the meeting’, which used to be regarded asprompted by the Holy Spirit. In their case, we are concerned withan unusually homogeneous community, but without somedegree of homogeneity government by discussion is unworkable.A sense of solidarity sufficient to make government by discussionpossible can be generated without much difficulty in afamily, such as the Fuggers or Rothschilds, in a small religiousbody such as the Quakers, in a barbarous tribe, or in a nation at14 leaders and followerswar or in danger of war. But outside pressure is all butindispensable: the members of a group hang together for fear ofhanging separately. A common peril is much the easiest wayof producing homogeneity. This, however, affords no solutionof the problem of power in the world as a whole. We wish toprevent the perils—e.g. war—which at present cause cohesion,but we do not wish to destroy social cooperation. This problemis difficult psychologically as well as politically, and if we mayjudge by analogy, it is likely to be solved, if at all, by an initialdespotism of some one nation. Free cooperation among nations,accustomed as they are to the liberum veto, is as difficult as amongthe Polish aristocracy before the Partition. Extinction, in this caseas in that, is likely to be thought preferable to common sense.Mankind need government, but in regions where anarchy hasprevailed they will, at first, submit only to despotism. We musttherefore seek first to secure government, even though despotic,and only when government has become habitual can we hopesuccessfully to make it democratic. ‘Absolute power is useful inbuilding the organisation. More slow, but equally sure, is thedevelopment of social pressure demanding that the power shallbe used for the benefit of all concerned. This pressure, constantin ecclesiastical and political history, is already making itsappearance in the economic field.’1I have spoken hitherto of those who command and those whoobey, but there is a third type, namely, those who withdraw.There are men who have the courage to refuse submission withouthaving the imperiousness that causes the wish to command.Such men do not fit readily into the social structure, and in oneway or another they seek a refuge where they can enjoy a moreor less solitary freedom. At times, men with this temperamenthave been of great historical importance; the early Christians and1 A. A. Berle and G. C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property, p. 353.They are speaking of industrial corporations.leaders and followers 15the American pioneers represent two species of the genus. Sometimesthe refuge is mental, sometimes physical; sometimes itdemands the complete solitude of a hermitage, sometimes thesocial solitude of a monastery. Among mental refugees are thosewho belong to obscure sects, those whose interests are absorbedby innocent fads, and those who occupy themselves with reconditeand unimportant forms of erudition. Among physical refugeesare men who seek the frontier of civilisation, and suchexplorers as Bates, the ‘naturalist on the Amazon’, who livedhappily for fifteen years without other society than the Indians.Something of the hermit’s temper is an essential element inmany forms of excellence, since it enables men to resist the lureof popularity, to pursue important work in spite of generalindifference or hostility, and to arrive at opinions which areopposed to prevalent errors.Of those who withdraw, some are not genuinely indifferent topower, but only unable to obtain it by the usual methods. Suchmen may become saints or heresiarchs, founders of monasticorders or of new schools in art or literature. They attach tothemselves as disciples people who combine a love of submissionwith an impulse to revolt; the latter prevents orthodoxy,while the former leads to uncritical adoption of the new tenets.Tolstoy and his followers illustrate this pattern. The genuine solitaryis quite different. A perfect example of this type is the melancholyJacques, who shares exile with the good Duke because itis exile; and afterwards remains in the forest with the bad Dukerather than return to Court. Many American pioneers, after sufferinglong hardship and privation, sold their farms and movedfurther West as soon as civilisation caught up with them. Formen of this temperament, the world affords fewer and feweropportunities. Some drift into crime, some into a morose andanti-social philosophy. Too much contact with their fellow-menproduces misanthropy, which, when solitude is unattainable,turns naturally towards violence.16 leaders and followersAmong the timid, organisation is promoted, not only bysubmission to a leader, but by the reassurance which is felt inbeing one of a crowd who all feel alike. In an enthusiastic publicmeeting, with whose purpose one is in sympathy, there is asense of exaltation, combined with warmth and safety: the emotionwhich is shared grows more and more intense until itcrowds out all other feelings except an exultant sense of powerproduced by the multiplication of the ego. Collective excitementis a delicious intoxication, in which sanity, humanity, and evenself-preservation are easily forgotten, and in which atrociousmassacres and heroic martyrdom are equally possible. This kindof intoxication, like others, is hard to resist when its delightshave once been experienced, but leads in the end to apathy andweariness, and to the need for a stronger and stronger stimulus ifthe former fervour is to be reproduced.Although a leader is not essential to this emotion, which canbe produced by music, and by some exciting event which is seenby a crowd, the words of an orator are the easiest and most usualmethod of inducing it. The pleasure of collective excitement is,therefore, an important element in the power of leaders. Theleader need not share in the feelings which he arouses; he maysay to himself, like Shakespeare’s Antony:Now let it work: mischief, thou art afoot,Take thou what course thou wilt!But the leader is hardly likely to be successful unless he enjoyshis power over his followers. He will therefore be led to a preferencefor the kind of situation, and the kind of mob, that makeshis success easy. The best situation is one in which there is adanger sufficiently serious to make men feel brave in combatingit, but not so terrifying as to make fear predominant—such asituation, for example, as the outbreak of war against an enemywho is thought formidable but not invincible. A skilful orator,leaders and followers 17when he wishes to stimulate warlike feeling, produces in hisaudience two layers of belief: a superficial layer, in which thepower of the enemy is magnified so as to make great courageseem necessary, and a deeper layer, in which there is a firmconviction of victory. Both are embodied in such a slogan as‘right will prevail over might’.The kind of mob that the orator will desire is one more givento emotion than to reflection, one filled with fears and consequenthatreds, one impatient of slow and gradual methods,and at once exasperated and hopeful. The orator, if he is not acomplete cynic, will acquire a set of beliefs that justify his activities.He will think that feeling is a better guide than reason, thatour opinions should be formed with the blood rather than thebrain, that the best elements in human life are collective ratherthan individual. If he controls education, he will make it consistof an alternation of drill and collective intoxication, while knowledgeand judgement will be left to the cold devotees ofinhuman science.Power-loving individuals, however, are not all of the oratortype. There are men of quite a different kind, whose love ofpower has been fed by control over mechanism. Take, forexample, Bruno Mussolini’s account of his exploits from the airin the Abyssinian war:‘We had to set fire to the wooded hills, to the fields and littlevillages. . . . It was all most diverting. . . . The bombs hardlytouched the earth before they burst out into white smoke andan enormous flame and the dry grass began to burn. I thoughtof the animals: God, how they ran . . . After the bomb-rackswere emptied I began throwing bombs by hand. . . . It was mostamusing: a big Zariba surrounded by tall trees was not easy tohit. I had to aim carefully at the straw roof and only succeededat the third shot. The wretches who were inside, seeing theirroof burning, jumped out and ran off like mad.18 leaders and followersSurrounded by a circle of fire about five thousand Abyssinianscame to a sticky end. It was like hell.While the orator needs much intuitive psychology for hissuccess, the aviator of Bruno Mussolini’s type can get his pleasurewith no more psychology than is involved in knowing that itis unpleasant to burn to death. The orator is an ancient type; theman whose power is based on mechanism is modern. Notwholly: read, for example, how Carthaginian elephants wereused, at the end of the first Punic War, to trample mutinousmercenaries to death, where the psychology, though not thescience, is the same as Bruno Mussolini’s.2 But speaking comparatively,mechanical power is more characteristic of our agethan of any previous time.The psychology of the oligarch who depends upon mechanicalpower is not, as yet, anywhere fully developed. It is, however,an imminent possibility, and quantitatively, though not qualitatively,quite new. It would now be feasible for a technicallytrained oligarchy, by controlling aeroplanes, navies, power stations,motor transport, and so on, to establish a dictatorshipdemanding almost no conciliation of subjects. The empire ofLaputa was maintained by its power of interposing itselfbetween the sun and a rebellious province; something almostequally drastic would be possible for a union of scientific technologists.They could starve a recalcitrant region, and deprive itof light and heat and electrical power after encouraging dependenceon these sources of comfort; they could flood it with poisongas or with bacteria. Resistance would be utterly hopeless.And the men in control, having been trained on mechanism,would view human material as they had learnt to view their ownmachines, as something unfeeling governed by laws which themanipulator can operate to his advantage. Such a régime would2 Diodorus Siculus, Bk. XXV (fragment). See Flaubert’s Salammbo.leaders and followers 19be characterised by a cold inhumanity surpassing anythingknown in previous tyrannies.Power over men, not power over matter, is my theme in thisbook; but it is possible to establish a technicological power overmen which is based upon power over matter. Those who havethe habit of controlling powerful mechanisms, and through thiscontrol have acquired power over human beings, may beexpected to have an imaginative outlook towards their subjectswhich will be completely different from that of men whodepend upon persuasion, however dishonest. Most of us have, atsome time, wantonly disturbed an ants’ nest, and watched withmild amusement the scurrying confusion that resulted. Lookingdown from the top of a sky-scraper on the traffic of New York,the human beings below cease to seem human, and acquire a faintabsurdity. If one were armed, like Jove, with a thunderbolt, therewould be a temptation to hurl it into the crowd, from the samemotive as in the case of the ants’ nest. This was evidently BrunoMussolini’s feeling, as he looked down upon the Abyssiniansfrom his aeroplane. Imagine a scientific government which,from fear of assassination, lives always in aeroplanes, except foroccasional descents on to landing stages on the summits of hightowers or rafts on the sea. Is it likely that such a government willhave any profound concern for the happiness of its subjects? Is itnot, on the contrary, practically certain that it will view them,when all goes well, in the impersonal manner in which it viewsits machines, but that, when anything happens to suggest thatafter all they are not machines, it will feel the cold rage of menwhose axioms are questioned by underlings, and will exterminateresistance in whatever manner involves least trouble?All this, the reader may think, is mere unnecessary nightmare.I wish I could share this view. Mechanical power, I am convinced,tends to generate a new mentality, which makes itmore important than in any former age to find ways of controllinggovernments. Democracy may have become more difficult20 leaders and followersowing to technical developments, but it has also become moreimportant. The man who has vast mechanical power at hiscommand is likely, if uncontrolled, to feel himself a god—not aChristian God of Love, but a pagan Thor or Vulcan.Leopardi describes what volcanic action has achieved on theslopes of Vesuvius:These lands that now are strewnWith sterilising cinders, and embossedWith lava frozen to stone,That echoes to the lonely pilgrim’s foot;Where nestling in the sun the snake lies coiled,And where in some cleftIn cavernous rocks the rabbit hurries home –Here once were happy farms,And tilth, and yellowing harvests, and the soundOf lowing herds; here tooGardens and palaces:Retreats dear to the leisureOf powerful lords; and here were famous towns,Which the implacable mountain, thundering forthMolten streams from its fiery mouth, destroyedWith all their habitants. Now all aroundLies crushed ’neath one vast ruin.33 Questi campi cosparsiDi ceneri infeconde, e ricopertiDall’ impietrata lava,Che sotto i passi al peregrin risona;Dove s’annida a si contorce al soleLa serpe, a dove al notoCavernoso covil torna il coniglio;Fur liete ville e colti,E biondeggiàr di spice, e risonaroDi muggito d’armenti;leaders and followers 21These results can now be achieved by men. They have beenachieved at Guernica; perhaps before long they will be achievedwhere as yet London stands. What good is to be expected of anoligarchy which will have climbed to dominion through suchdestruction? And if it were Berlin and Rome, not London andParis, that were destroyed by the thunderbolts of the new gods,could any humanity survive in the destroyers after such a deed?Would not those who had human feelings to begin with bedriven mad by suppressed pity, and become even worse thanthose who had no need of suppressing their compassion?In former days, men sold themselves to the Devil to acquiremagical powers. Nowadays they acquire these powers from science,and find themselves compelled to become devils. There isno hope for the world unless power can be tamed, and broughtinto the service, not of this or that group of fanatical tyrants, butof the whole human race, white and yellow and black, fascistand communist and democrat; for science has made it inevitablethat all must live or all must die.Fur giardini e palagi,Agli ozi de’ potentiGradito ospizio, e fur città famose,Che coi torrenti suoi l’ altero monteDall’ ignea bocco fulminando oppresseCon gli abitanti insieme. Or tutto intornoUna ruina involve.I owe the above translation to the kindness of my friend, Mr R. C. Trevelyan.22 leaders and followers3THE FORMS OF POWERPower may be defined as the production of intended effects. It isthus a quantitative concept: given two men with similar desires,if one achieves all the desires that the other achieves, and alsoothers, he has more power than the other. But there is no exactmeans of comparing the power of two men of whom one canachieve one group of desires, and another another; e.g. given twoartists of whom each wishes to paint good pictures and becomerich, and of whom one succeeds in painting good pictures andthe other in becoming rich, there is no way of estimating whichhas the more power. Nevertheless, it is easy to say, roughly, thatA has more power than B, if A achieves many intended effectsand B only a few.There are various ways of classifying the forms of power, eachof which has its utility. In the first place, there is power overhuman beings and power over dead matter or non-human formsof life. I shall be concerned mainly with power over humanbeings, but it will be necessary to remember that the chief causeof change in the modern world is the increased power overmatter that we owe to science.Power over human beings may be classified by the manner ofinfluencing individuals, or by the type of organisation involved.An individual may be influenced: A. By direct physical powerover his body, e.g. when he is imprisoned or killed; B. Byrewards and punishments as inducements, e.g. in giving orwithholding employment; C. By influence on opinion, i.e.propaganda in its broadest sense. Under this last head I shouldinclude the opportunity for creating desired habits in others, e.g.by military drill, the only difference being that in such casesaction follows without any such mental intermediary as couldbe called opinion.These forms of power are most nakedly and simply displayedin our dealings with animals, where disguises and pretences arenot thought necessary. When a pig with a rope round its middleis hoisted squealing into a ship, it is subject to direct physicalpower over its body. On the other hand, when the proverbialdonkey follows the proverbial carrot, we induce him to act as wewish by persuading him that it is to his interest to do so. Intermediatebetween these two cases is that of performing animals,in whom habits have been formed by rewards and punishments;also, in a different way, that of sheep induced to embark on aship, when the leader has to be dragged across the gangway byforce, and the rest then follow willingly.All these forms of power are exemplified among humanbeings.The case of the pig illustrates military and police power.The donkey with the carrot typifies the power of propaganda.Performing animals show the power of ‘education’.The sheep following their unwilling leader are illustrative ofparty politics, whenever, as is usual, a revered leader is in bondageto a clique or to party bosses.Let us apply these Aesopian analogies to the rise of Hitler. Thecarrot was the Nazi programme (involving, e.g. the abolition ofinterest); the donkey was the lower middle class. The sheep and24 the forms of powertheir leader were the Social Democrats and Hindenburg. The pigs(only so far as their misfortunes are concerned) were the victimsin concentration camps, and the performing animals are themillions who make the Nazi salute.The most important organisations are approximately distinguishableby the kind of power that they exert. The army andthe police exercise coercive power over the body; economicorganisations, in the main, use rewards and punishments asincentives and deterrents; schools, churches, and political partiesaim at influencing opinion. But these distinctions are not veryclearcut, since every organisation uses other forms of power inaddition to the one which is most characteristic.The power of the Law will illustrate these complexities. Theultimate power of the Law is the coercive power of the State. It isthe characteristic of civilised communities that direct physicalcoercion is (with some limitations) the prerogative of the State,and the Law is a set of rules according to which the State exercisesthis prerogative in dealing with its own citizens. But theLaw uses punishment, not only for the purpose of makingundesired actions physically impossible, but also as an inducement;a fine, for example, does not make an action impossible,but only unattractive. Moreover—and this is a much moreimportant matter—the Law is almost powerless when it is notsupported by public sentiment, as might be seen in the UnitedStates during Prohibition, or in Ireland in the eighties, whenmoonlighters had the sympathy of a majority of the population.Law, therefore, as an effective force, depends upon opinion andsentiment even more than upon the powers of the police. Thedegree of feeling in favour of Law is one of the most importantcharacteristics of a community.This brings us to a very necessary distinction, between traditionalpower and newly acquired power. Traditional power hason its side the force of habit; it does not have to justify itself atevery moment, nor to prove continually that no opposition isthe forms of power 25strong enough to overthrow it. Moreover it is almost invariablyassociated with religious or quasi-religious beliefs purportingto show that resistance is wicked. It can, accordingly, relyupon public opinion to a much greater degree than is possiblefor revolutionary or usurped power. This has two more or lessopposite consequences: on the one hand, traditional power,since it feels secure, is not on the look-out for traitors, and islikely to avoid much active political tyranny; on the otherhand, where ancient institutions persist, the injustices towhich holders of power are always prone have the sanction ofimmemorial custom, and can therefore be more glaring thanwould be possible under a new form of government whichhoped to win popular support. The reign of terror in Franceillustrates the revolutionary kind of tyranny, the corvée the traditionalkind.Power not based on tradition or assent I call ‘naked’ power. Itscharacteristics differ greatly from those of traditional power. Andwhere traditional power persists, the character of the régimedepends, to an almost unlimited extent, upon its feeling ofsecurity or insecurity.Naked power is usually military, and may take the form eitherof internal tyranny or of foreign conquest. Its importance, especiallyin the latter form, is very great indeed—greater, I think,than many modern ‘scientific’ historians are willing to admit.Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar altered the whole courseof history by their battles. But for the former, the Gospels wouldnot have been written in Greek, and Christianity could not havebeen preached throughout the Roman Empire. But for the latter,the French would not speak a language derived from Latin, andthe Catholic Church could scarcely have existed. The militarysuperiority of the white man to the American Indian is an evenmore undeniable example of the power of the sword. Conquestby force of arms has had more to do with the spread of civilisationthan any other single agency. Nevertheless, military power26 the forms of poweris, in most cases, based upon some other form of power, such aswealth, or technical knowledge, or fanaticism. I do not suggestthat this is always the case; for example, in the War of the SpanishSuccession Marlborough’s genius was essential to the result. Butthis is to be regarded as an exception to the general rule.When a traditional form of power comes to an end, it may besucceeded, not by naked power, but by a revolutionary authoritycommanding the willing assent of the majority or a large minorityof the population. So it was, for example, in America in theWar of Independence. Washington’s authority had none of thecharacteristics of naked power. Similarly, in the Reformation,new Churches were established to take the place of the CatholicChurch, and their success was due much more to assent than toforce. A revolutionary authority, if it is to succeed in establishingitself without much use of naked power, requires much morevigorous and active popular support than is needed by a traditionalauthority. When the Chinese Republic was proclaimed in1911, the men of foreign education decreed a parliamentaryConstitution, but the public was apathetic, and the régimequickly became one of naked power under warring Tuchuns(military governors). Such unity as was afterwards achieved bythe Kuo-Min-Tang depended on nationalism, not parliamentarianism.The same sort of thing has happened frequently in LatinAmerica. In all these cases, the authority of Parliament, if it hadhad sufficient popular support to succeed, would have beenrevolutionary; but the purely military power which was in factvictorious was naked.The distinction between traditional, revolutionary, and nakedpower is psychological. I do not call power traditional merelybecause it has ancient forms: it must also command respectwhich is partly due to custom. As this respect decays, traditionalpower gradually passes over into naked power. The process wasto be seen in Russia in the gradual growth of the revolutionarymovement up to the moment of its victory in 1917.the forms of power 27I call power revolutionary when it depends upon a largegroup united by a new creed, programme, or sentiment, such asProtestantism, Communism, or desire for national independence.I call power naked when it results merely from the powerlovingimpulses of individuals or groups, and wins from itssubjects only submission through fear, not active cooperation. Itwill be seen that the nakedness of power is a matter of degree. Ina democratic country, the power of the government is not nakedin relation to opposing political parties, but is naked in relationto a convinced anarchist. Similarly, where persecution exists, thepower of the Church is naked in relation to heretics, but not inrelation to orthodox sinners.Another division of our subject is between the power oforganisations and the power of individuals. The way in which anorganisation acquires power is one thing, and the way in whichan individual acquires power within an organisation is quiteanother. The two are, of course, interrelated: if you wish to bePrime Minister, you must acquire power in your Party, and yourParty must acquire power in the nation. But if you had livedbefore the decay of the hereditary principle, you would have hadto be the heir of a king in order to acquire political control of anation; this would, however, not have enabled you to conquerother nations, for which you would have needed qualities thatkings’ sons often lack. In the present age, a similar situation stillexists in the economic sphere, where the plutocracy is largelyhereditary. Consider the two hundred plutocratic families inFrance against whom French Socialists agitate. But dynastiesamong the plutocracy have not the same degree of permanenceas they formerly had on thrones, because they have failed tocause the widespread acceptance of the doctrine of Divine Right.No one thinks it impious for arising financial magnate toimpoverish one who is the son of his father, provided it is doneaccording to the rules and without introducing subversiveinnovations.28 the forms of powerDifferent types of organisation bring different types of individualsto the top, and so do different states of society. An ageappears in history through its prominent individuals, andderives its apparent character from the character of these men.As the qualities required for achieving prominence change, sothe prominent men change. It is to be presumed that there weremen like Lenin in the twelfth century, and that there are men likeRichard Coeur de Lion at the present time; but history does notknow of them. Let us consider for a moment the kinds ofindividuals produced by different types of power.Hereditary power has given rise to our notion of a ‘gentleman’.This is a somewhat degenerate form of a conceptionwhich has a long history, from magic properties of chiefs,through the divinity of kings, to knightly chivalry and the bluebloodedaristocrat. The qualities which are admired, wherepower is hereditary, are such as result from leisure andunquestioned superiority. Where power is aristocratic ratherthan monarchical, the best manners include courteousbehaviour towards equals as an addition to bland self-assertionin dealing with inferiors. But whatever the prevalent conceptionof manners may be, it is only where power is (or lately was)hereditary that men will be judged by their manners. The bourgeoisgentilhomme is only laughable when he intrudes into a societyof men and women who have never had anything better to dothan study social niceties. What survives in the way of admirationof the ‘gentleman’ depends upon inherited wealth, andmust rapidly disappear if economic as well as political powerceases to pass from father to son.A very different type of character comes to the fore wherepower is achieved through learning or wisdom, real or supposed.The two most important examples of this form of powerare traditional China and the Catholic Church. There is less of itin the modern world than there has been at most times in thepast; apart from the Church, in England, very little of this type ofthe forms of power 29power remains. Oddly enough, the power of what passes forlearning is greatest in the most savage communities, and steadilydecreases as civilisation advances. When I say ‘learning’ Iinclude, of course, reputed learning, such as that of magiciansand medicine men. Twenty years of study are required in orderto obtain a Doctor’s Degree at the University of Lhasa, which isnecessary for all the higher posts except that of Dalai Lama. Thisposition is much what it was in Europe in the year 1000, whenPope Silvester II was reputed a magician because he read books,and was consequently able to increase the power of the Churchby inspiring metaphysical terrors.The intellectual, as we know him, is a spiritual descendant ofthe priest; but the spread of education has robbed him of power.The power of the intellectual depends upon superstition: reverencefor a traditional incantation or a sacred book. Of these,something survives in English-speaking countries, as is seen inthe English attitude to the Coronation Service and the Americanreverence for the Constitution: accordingly, the Archbishop ofCanterbury and the Supreme Court Judges still have some of thetraditional power of learned men. But this is only a pale ghost ofthe power of Egyptian priests or Chinese Confucian scholars.While the typical virtue of the gentleman is honour, that ofthe man who achieves power through learning is wisdom. Togain a reputation for wisdom a man must seem to have a store ofrecondite knowledge, a mastery over his passions, and a longexperience of the ways of men. Age alone is thought to givesomething of these qualities; hence ‘presbyter’, ‘seigneur’,‘alderman’, and ‘elder’ are terms of respect. A Chinese beggaraddresses passers-by as ‘great old sire’. But where the power ofwise men is organised, there is a corporation of priests or literati,among whom all wisdom is held to be concentrated. The sage isa very different type of character from the knightly warrior, andproduces, where he rules, a very different society. China andJapan illustrate the contrast.30 the forms of powerWe have already noted the curious fact that, although knowledgeplays a larger part in civilisation now than at any formertime, there has not been any corresponding growth of poweramong those who possess the new knowledge. Although theelectrician and the telephone man do strange things that ministerto our comfort (or discomfort), we do not regard them asmedicine-men, or imagine that they can cause thunderstorms ifwe annoy them. The reason for this is that scientific knowledge,though difficult, is not mysterious, but open to all who care totake the necessary trouble. The modern intellectual, therefore,inspires no awe, but remains a mere employee; except in a fewcases, such as the Archbishop of Canterbury, he has failed toinherit the glamour which gave power to his predecessors.The truth is that the respect accorded to men of learning wasnever bestowed for genuine knowledge, but for the supposedpossession of magical powers. Science, in giving some realacquaintance with natural processes, has destroyed the belief inmagic, and therefore the respect for the intellectual. Thus it hascome about that, while men of science are the fundamentalcause of the features which distinguish our time from formerages, and have, through their discoveries and inventions, animmeasurable influence upon the course of events, they havenot, as individuals, as great a reputation for wisdom as may beenjoyed in India by a naked fakir or in Melanesia by a medicineman.The intellectuals, finding their prestige slipping from themas a result of their own activities, become dissatisfied with themodern world. Those in whom the dissatisfaction is least take toCommunism; those in whom it goes deeper shut themselves upin their ivory tower.The growth of large economic organisations has produced anew type of powerful individual: the ‘executive’, as he is calledin America. The typical ‘executive’ impresses others as a man ofrapid decisions, quick insight into character, and iron will; hemust have a firm jaw, tightly closed lips, and a habit of brief andthe forms of power 31incisive speech. He must be able to inspire respect in equals, andconfidence in subordinates who are by no means nonentities. Hemust combine the qualities of a great general and a great diplomatist:ruthlessness in battle, but a capacity for skilful concessionin negotiation. It is by such qualities that men acquire control ofimportant economic organisations.Political power, in a democracy, tends to belong to men of atype which differs considerably from the three that we haveconsidered hitherto. A politician, if he is to succeed, must be ableto win the confidence of his machine, and then to arouse somedegree of enthusiasm in a majority of the electorate. The qualitiesrequired for these two stages on the road to power are by nomeans identical, and many men possess the one without theother. Candidates for the Presidency in the United States are notinfrequently men who cannot stir the imagination of the generalpublic, though they possess the art of ingratiating themselveswith party managers. Such men are, as a rule, defeated, but theparty managers do not foresee their defeat. Sometimes, however,the machine is able to secure the victory of a man without‘magnetism’; in such cases, it dominates him after his election,and he never achieves real power. Sometimes, on the contrary, aman is able to create his own machine; Napoleon III, Mussolini,and Hitler are examples of this. More commonly, a really successfulpolitician, though he uses an already existing machine, isable ultimately to dominate it and make it subservient to his will.The qualities which make a successful politician in a democracyvary according to the character of the times; they are notthe same in quiet times as they are during war or revolution. Inquiet times, a man may succeed by giving an impression ofsolidity and sound judgement, but in times of excitement somethingmore is needed. At such times, it is necessary to be animpressive speaker—not necessarily eloquent in the conventionalsense, for Robespierre and Lenin were not eloquent,but determined, passionate, and bold. The passion may be cold32 the forms of powerand controlled, but must exist and be felt. In excited times, apolitician needs no power of reasoning, no apprehension ofimpersonal facts, and no shred of wisdom. What he must have isthe capacity of persuading the multitude that what they passionatelydesire is attainable, and that he, through his ruthlessdetermination, is the man to attain it.The most successful democratic politicians are those who succeedin abolishing democracy and becoming dictators. This, ofcourse, is only possible in certain circumstances; no one couldhave achieved it in nineteenth-century England. But when it ispossible, it requires only a high degree of the same qualities asare required by democratic politicians in general, at any rate inexcited times. Lenin, Mussolini, and Hitler owed their rise todemocracy.When once a dictatorship has been established, the qualitiesby which a man succeeds a dead dictator are totally differentfrom those by which the dictatorship was originally created.Wire-pulling, intrigue, and Court favour are the most importantmethods when heredity is discarded. For this reason, a dictatorshipis sure to change its character very considerably after thedeath of its founder. And since the qualities by which a mansucceeds to a dictatorship are less generally impressive thanthose by which the régime was created, there is a likelihood ofinstability, palace revolutions, and ultimate reversion to somedifferent system. It is hoped, however, that modern methods ofpropaganda may successfully counteract this tendency, by creatingpopularity for the Head of the State without the need for anydisplay of popular qualities on his part. How far such methodscan succeed it is as yet impossible to say.There is one form of the power of individuals which we havenot yet considered, namely, power behind the scenes: the powerof courtiers, intriguers, spies, and wire-pullers. In every largeorganisation, where the men in control have considerable power,there are other less prominent men (or women) who acquirethe forms of power 33influence over the leaders by personal methods. Wire-pullersand party bosses belong to the same type, though their techniqueis different. They put their friends, quietly, into key positions,and so, in time, control the organisation. In a dictatorshipwhich is not hereditary, such men may hope to succeed to thedictator when he dies; but in general they prefer not to take thefront of the stage. They are men who love power more thanglory; often they are socially timid. Sometimes, like eunuchs inOriental monarchies, or kings’ mistresses elsewhere, they are,for one reason or another, debarred from titular leadership. Theirinfluence is greatest where nominal power is hereditary, andleast where it is the reward of personal skill and energy. Suchmen, however, even in the most modern forms of government,inevitably have considerable power in those departments whichaverage men consider mysterious. Of these the most important,in our time, are currency and foreign policy. In the time ofthe Kaiser William II, Baron Holstein (permanent Head of theGerman Foreign Office) had immense power, although he madeno public appearances. How great is the power of the permanentofficials in the British Foreign Office at the present day, it isimpossible for us to know; the necessary documents maybecome known to our children. The qualities required for powerbehind the scenes are very different from those required for allother kinds, and as a rule, though not always, they are undesirablequalities. A system which accords much power to the courtieror the wire-puller is, therefore, in general not a system likelyto promote the general welfare.34 the forms of power4PRIESTLY POWERIn this chapter and the next I propose to consider the two formsof traditional power which have had most importance in pasttimes; namely, priestly amd kingly authority. Both are nowsomewhat in eclipse, and, although it would be rash to assumethat neither will revive, their decline, whether permanent ortemporary, makes it possible to study both institutions with acompleteness which is not attainable where still vigorous formsof power are concerned.Priests and kings, though in a rudimentary form, exist amongthe most primitive societies known to anthropologists. Sometimesone person combines the functions of both. This occursnot only among savages, but in highly civilised States. Augustus,in Rome, was Pontifex Maximus, and in the provinces was a god.The Caliph was the head of the Mohammedan religion as well asof the State. The Mikado, at the present day, has a similar positionin the Shinto religion. There has been a strong tendency forkings to lose their secular functions owing to their sacredness,and thus to develop into priests. Nevertheless, at most times andplaces, the distinction between priest and king has been obviousand definite.The most primitive form of priest is the medicine-man,whose powers are of two kinds, which anthropologists distinguishas religious and magical. Religious powers dependupon the assistance of superhuman beings, while magicalpowers are supposed to be natural. For our purposes, however,this distinction is not important. What is important is that themedicine-man, whether by magic or by religion, is thought tobe able to do good or harm to other people, and that his powersare not shared by all and sundry. A certain amount of magic, it isthought, may be practised by the laity, but the medicine-man’smagic is stronger. When a man falls ill or meets with an accident,it is usually due to the malevolent magic of an enemy, but themedicine-man knows of ways by which the evil spell can beremoved. Thus in Duke of York Island the medicine-man, afterdiscovering by divination the source of the patient’s illness, takesa packet of lime and recites a magical formula:Lime of exorcism. I banish the octopus; I banish the teo snake;I banish the spirit of the Ingiet (a secret society); I banish thecrab; I banish the water snake; I banish the balivo snake; Ibanish the python; I banish the kaia dog. Lime of exorcism. Ibanish the slimy fluid; I banish the kete creeping plant; I banishTo Pilana; I banish To Wuwu-Tawur; I banish Tumbal. One hassunk them right down deep in the sea. Vapour shall arise tohold them afar; clouds shall arise to hold them afar; darknessshall reign to hold them afar; they shall betake themselves tothe depths of the sea.1It must not be supposed that this formula is usually ineffective.Savages are much more subject to suggestion than civilised1 W. H. R. Rivers, Medicine, Magic, and Religion, p. 16.36 priestly powermen, and therefore their diseases can very often be both causedand cured by this agency.In most parts of Melanesia, according to Rivers, the man whocures diseases is the sorcerer or priest. There is not apparently, inthese regions, a very clear differentiation between medicinemenand others, and some of the simpler remedies may be usedby anyone. ButThose who combine the practice of medicine with that ofmagical or religious rites usually acquire their art by a specialprocess, either of initiation or instruction, and in Melanesiasuch knowledge has always to be purchased. The most completeinstruction in any branch of medico-magical or medicoreligiousart is of no avail to the pupil unless money has passedfrom himself to his instructor.2From such beginnings it is easy to imagine the developmentof a definite priestly caste, with a monopoly of the moreimportant magical and religious powers, and consequently withgreat authority over the community. In Egypt and Babyloniatheir power proved itself greater that that of the king when thetwo came into conflict. They defeated the ‘atheist’ PharaohIkhnaton,3 and they seem to have treacherously helped Cyrus toconquer Babylon because their native king showed a tendency toanti-clericalism.Greece and Rome were peculiar in antiquity owing to theiralmost complete freedom from priestly power. In Greece, suchreligious power as existed was chiefly concentrated in theoracles, especially Delphi, where the Pythoness was supposedto fall into a trance and give answers inspired by Apollo. It was,however, well known by the time of Herodotus that the oracle2 Ibid., p. 44.3 Or Akhnaton.priestly power 37could be bribed. Both Herodotus and Aristotle relate thatthe Alcmaeonidae, an important Athenian family exiled byPeisistratus (died 527 ..), corruptly procured the support ofDelphi against his sons. What Herodotus says is curious: theAlcmaeonidae, he tells us, ‘if we may believe the Athenians,persuaded the Pythoness by a bribe to tell the Spartans, wheneverany of them came to consult the oracle, either on their ownprivate affairs or on the business of the State, that they mustfree Athens (from the tyranny of the Peisistratidae). So theLacedaemonians, when they found no answer ever returned tothem but this, sent at last Anchimolius, the son of Aster—aman of note among their citizens—at the head of an armyagainst Athens, with orders to drive out the Peisistratidae, albeitthey were bound to them by the closest ties of friendship. Forthey esteemed the things of heaven more highly than thethings of men’.4Though Anchimolius was defeated, a subsequent largerexpedition was successful, the Alcmaeonidae and the otherexiles recovered power, and Athens again enjoyed what wascalled ‘freedom’.There are several remarkable features in this narrative. Herodotusis a pious man, completely devoid of cynicism, and hethinks well of the Spartans for listening to the oracle. But heprefers Athens to Sparta, and in Athenian affairs he is againstthe Peisistratidae. Nevertheless it is the Athenians whom hecites as authorities for the bribery, and no punishment befellthe successful party or the Pythoness for their impiety.5 TheAlcmaeonidae were still prominent in the days of Herodotus;in fact the most famous of them was his contemporaryPericles.4 Bk. V, Ch. 63. Rawlinson’s translation.5 Herodotus gives another instance of corruption of the Pythoness, Bk. VI,Ch. 66.38 priestly powerAristotle, in his book on the Constitution of Athens, representsthe transaction in an even more discreditable light. Thetemple at Delphi had been destroyed by fire in 548 .., andfunds for the purpose of rebuilding it were collected throughoutGreece by the Alcmaeonidae. They—so Aristotle avers—usedpart of the funds to bribe the Pythoness, and made the expenditureof the rest conditional on the overthrow of Hippias, son ofPeisistratus, by which means Apollo was won over to their side.In spite of such scandals, control of the oracle at Delphiremained a matter of such political importance as to be the causeof a serious war, called, on account of its connection withreligion, the ‘Sacred’ War. But in the long run the open recognitionof the fact that the oracle was open to political control musthave encouraged the spread of free thought, which ultimatelymade it possible for the Romans, without incurring the odiumof sacrilege, to rob Greek temples of most of their wealth and allof their authority. It is the fate of most religious institutions,sooner or later, to be used by bold men for secular purposes, andthereby to forfeit the reverence upon which their powerdepends. In the Graeco-Roman world this happened moresmoothly and with less upheaval than elsewhere, becausereligion had never the same strength as in Asia and Africa andmediaeval Europe. The only country analogous to Greece andRome in this respect is China.Hitherto we have been concerned only with religions whichhave come down from immemorial antiquity, without anyknown historical origin. But these have been superseded, almosteverywhere, by religions derived from founders; the onlyimportant exceptions are Shinto and Brahmanism. The originsof the older religions, as of those found by anthropologistsamong present-day savages, are completely obscure. Among themost primitive savages, as we have seen, there is not a clearlydifferentiated priestly caste; it would seem that, at first, priestlyfunctions are a prerogative of the older men, and presumablypriestly power 39especially of such as produce an impression of wisdom, orsometimes of pre-eminence in malignant magic.6With advancing civilisation, in most countries, priestsbecome increasingly separate from the rest of the populationand increasingly powerful. But as the guardians of an ancienttradition they are conservative, and as possessors of wealth andpower they tend to become hostile or indifferent to personalreligion. Sooner or later, their whole system is overthrown bythe followers of a revolutionary prophet. Buddha, Christ, andMohammed are the historically most important examples. Thepower of their followers was at first revolutionary, and onlygradually became traditional. In the process they usuallyabsorbed much of the old tradition which they had nominallyoverthrown.Both religious and secular innovators—at any rate those whohave had most lasting success—have appealed, as far as theycould, to tradition, and have done whatever lay in their power tominimise the elements of novelty in their system. The usual planis to invent a more or less fictitious past and pretend to berestoring its institutions. In 2 Kings xxii we are told how thepriests ‘found’ the Book of the Law, and the King caused a‘return’ to observance of its precepts. The New Testamentappealed to the authority of the Prophets; the Anabaptistsappealed to the New Testament; the English Puritans, in secularmatters, appealed to the supposed institutions of England beforethe Conquest. The Japanese, in .. 645, ‘restored’ the powerof the Mikado; in 1868, they ‘restored’ the constitution of.. 645. A whole series of rebels, throughout the Middle Agesand down to the 18 Brumaire, ‘restored’ the republican institutionsof Rome. Napoleon ‘restored’ the empire of Charlemagne,but this was felt to be a trifle too theatrical, and failed to impresseven that rhetorically minded age. These are only a few illustra-6 W. H. R. Rivers, Social Organization, p. 167.40 priestly powertions, selected at random, of the respect which even the greatestinnovators have shown for the power of tradition.The most powerful and important of all priestly organisationsknown to history has been the Catholic Church. I am concernedin this chapter with the power of priests only in so far as it istraditional; I will not, therefore, at present, consider the earlyperiod when the power of the Church was revolutionary. Afterthe fall of the Roman Empire, the Church had the good fortuneto represent two traditions: in addition to that of Christianity,it also embodied that of Rome. The barbarians had the powerof the sword, but the Church had a higher level of civilisationand education, a consistent impersonal purpose, the means ofappealing to religious hopes and superstitious fears, and, aboveall, the sole organisation that extended throughout WesternEurope. The Greek Church, which had to deal with the comparativelystable empires of Constantinople and Moscow, becamecompletely subordinate to the State; but in the West the strugglecontinued, with varying fortunes, until the Reformation, and tothis day is not ended in Germany and Mexico and Spain.For the first six centuries after the barbarian invasion theWestern Church was unable to contend on equal terms with theturbulent and passionate Germanic kings and barons who ruledin England and France, in North Italy and in Christian Spain. Forthis there were several reasons. Justinian’s conquests in Italy hadfor a time made the Papacy a Byzantine institution, and hadgreatly diminished its influence in the West. The higher clergywere drawn, with few exceptions, from the feudal aristocracies,with whom they felt more at one than with a distant and alienPope whose interferences were resented. The lower clergy wereignorant and mostly married, with the result that they weremore anxious to transmit their benefices to their sons than tofight the battles of the Church. Travel was so difficult that Romanauthority could not be exerted in distant kingdoms. The firsteffective government over a large area was not that of the Pope,priestly power 41but that of Charlemagne, whom all his contemporaries regardedas unquestionably the Pope’s superior.After the year 1000, when it was found that the expected endof the world had not taken place, there was a rapid advance incivilisation. Contact with the Moors in Spain and Sicily hastenedthe rise of the scholastic philosophy. The Normans, after beingfor centuries a mere piratical scourge, acquired, in France andSicily, whatever the contemporary world had to teach, andbecame a force for order and religion instead of for disorder;moreover they found papal authority useful for the purpose oflegitimising their conquests. By them, for the first time, ecclesiasticalEngland was brought completely under the dominationof Rome. Meanwhile, both the Emperor and the King of Francewere having the greatest difficulty in controlling their vassals. Itwas in these circumstances that the statesmanship and ruthlessenergy of Gregory VII (Hildebrand) inaugurated the increase ofthe papal power which continued throughout the next two centuries.As this period affords the supreme example of priestlypower, I shall consider it in some detail.The great days of the Papacy, which begin with the accessionof Gregory VII (1073), extend to Clement V’s establishment ofthe Papacy at Avignon (1306). Its victories during this periodwere won by what are called ‘spiritual’ weapons, i.e. by superstition,not by force of arms. Throughout the whole period, thePopes were outwardly at the mercy of the Roman mob, led bythe turbulent nobles of the City—for, whatever the rest ofChristendom might think, Rome never had any reverence forits Pontiff. The great Hildebrand himself died in exile; yet heacquired and transmitted the power to humble even the greatestmonarchs. Canossa, though its immediate political consequenceswere convenient for the Emperor Henry IV, became a symbol forsubsequent ages. Bismarck, during the Kulturkampf, said ‘wewill not go to Canossa’; but he boasted prematurely. Henry IV,who had been excommunicated, needed absolution to further42 priestly powerhis schemes, and Gregory, though he could not refuse absolutionto a penitent, exacted humiliation as the price of reconciliationwith the Church. As politicians, men might rail against thePope, but only heretics questioned the power of the keys, andheresy was not countenanced even by the Emperor Frederick IIat the height of his struggle with the Papacy.Gregory VII’s pontificate was the culmination of an importantperiod of ecclesiastical reform. Until his day, the Emperorhad been definitely above the Pope, and had claimed, notinfrequently, a decisive voice in his election. Henry III, father ofHenry IV, had deposed Gregory VI for simony, and had made aGerman Pope, Clement II. Yet Henry II was not in conflict withthe Church; on the contrary, he was a saintly man, allied with allthe most zealous ecclesiastics of his time. The reform movementwhich he supported, and which Gregory VII carried to triumph,was directed essentially against the tendency of the Church tobecome infected with feudalism. Kings and nobles appointedArchbishops and Bishops, who themselves, as a rule, belongedto the feudal aristocracy, and took a very secular view of theirown position. In the Empire, the greatest men under theEmperor had been originally officials, who held their lands invirtue of their official position; but by the end of the eleventhcentury they had become hereditary nobles, whose possessionspassed by inheritance. There was a danger of something similarin the Church, particularly in the lower ranks of the secularclergy. The reforming party in the Church attacked the cognateevils of simony and ‘concubinage’ (as they called the marriage ofpriests). In their campaign they showed zeal, courage, devotion,and much worldly wisdom; by their holiness they secured thesupport of the laity, and by their eloquence they won overassemblies originally hostile. At Milan in 1058, for example,St Peter Damian summoned the clergy to obedience to thereforming decrees of Rome; at first he provoked so much angerthat his life was in danger, but at last he prevailed, and it waspriestly power 43found that every single priest among the Milanese, from theArchbishop downward, had been guilty of simony. All confessed,and promised obedience for the future; on these terms,they were not dispossessed, but it was made clear that futureoffences would be punished without mercy.Clerical celibacy was one of Hildebrand’s preoccupations; inenforcing it, he enlisted the laity, who were frequently guilty ofgross cruelty towards priests and their wives. The campaign wasnot, of course, completely successful—to this day it has notsucceeded in Spain—but one of its main objects was achieved bythe decree that sons of priests could not be ordained, whichprevented the local priesthood from becoming hereditary.One of the most important triumphs of the reform movementwas the fixing of the method of Papal election by the decree of1059. Before this decree, the Emperor and the Roman populacehad certain ill-defined rights, which made schisms and disputedelections frequent. The new decree succeeded—though notimmediately and not without a struggle—in confining the rightof election to the Cardinals.This reform movement, which filled the latter half of theeleventh century, succeeded, to a great extent, in separatingAbbots, Bishops, and Archbishops from the feudal nobility, andin giving the Pope a voice in their appointment—for when hehad been given no voice he could usually find a taint of simony.It impressed the laity and greatly increased their reverence forthe Church. When it succeeded in imposing celibacy, it madepriests more markedly separate from the rest of the world, andno doubt stimulated their power impulses, as asceticism does inmost cases. It inspired leading ecclesiastics with moral enthusiasmfor a cause in which every one believed except those whoprofited by the traditional corruption, and as the chief means offurthering this cause it involved a great increase of Papal power.Power dependent upon propaganda usually demands, as in thiscase, exceptional courage and self-sacrifice at the start; but when44 priestly powerrespect has been won by these qualities, they can be discarded,and the respect can be used as a means to worldly advancement.Then, in time, the respect decays, and the advantages which it hadsecured are lost. Sometimes the process takes a few years, sometimesthousands of years, but in essence it is always the same.Gregory VII was no pacifist. He favourite text was: ‘Cursed bethe man that keepeth back his sword from blood’. But heexplained this as prohibiting keeping back the word of preachingfrom carnal men, which shows the justice of his views onthe power of propaganda.Nicholas Breakspear, the only Englishman who ever occupiedthe Papal Chair (1154–59), shows the theological power of thePope in a somewhat different connection. Arnold of Brescia, apupil of Abélard, preached the doctrine that ‘clerks who haveestates, bishops who hold fiefs, monks who possess property,cannot be saved’. This doctrine, of course, was not orthodox.St Bernard said of him. ‘A man who neither eats nor drinks, heonly, like the Devil, hungers and thirsts for the blood of souls.’St Bernard none the less admitted his exemplary piety, whichmade him a useful ally for the Romans in their conflict with thePope and Cardinals, whom, in the year 1143, they had succeededin driving into exile. He supported the revived RomanRepublic, which sought moral sanction in his doctrine. ButAdrian IV (Breakspear), taking advantage of the murder ofa Cardinal, placed Rome under an interdict during Holy Week.As Good Friday approached, theological terrors seized uponthe Senate, which made abject submission. By the help of theEmperor Frederick Barbarossa, Arnold was captured; he washanged, his body was burnt, and his ashes were thrown into theTiber. Thus it was proved that priests have a right to be rich.The Pope, to reward the Emperor, crowned him in St Peter’s.The Emperor’s troops had been useful, but not so useful as theCatholic Faith, to which, much more than to secular support, theChurch owed both its power and its wealth.priestly power 45The doctrines of Arnold of Brescia were such as to reconcilePope and Emperor to each other; for each recognized thatboth were necessary to the established order. But when Arnoldwas disposed of, the inevitable quarrel soon broke out afresh. Inthe long war that ensued, the Pope had a new ally, namely theLombard League. The cities of Lombardy, especially Milan, wererich and commercial; they were at that time in the forefrontof economic development, a fact which is commemorated forEnglishmen in the name ‘Lombard Street’. The Emperor stoodfor feudalism, to which bourgeois capitalism was already hostile.Although the Church prohibited ‘usury’, the Pope was a borrower,and found the capital of North Italian bankers so usefulthat theological rigour had to be softened. The conflict ofBarbarossa with the Papacy, which lasted for about twenty years,ended in a draw, and it was chiefly owing to the Lombard Citiesthat the Emperor was not victorious.In the long contest between the Papacy and the EmperorFrederick II, the ultimate victory of the Pope was due, in themain, to two causes: the opposition of the commercially mindedcities of North Italy, Tuscany as well as Lombardy, to the feudalsystem, and the pious enthusiasm aroused by the Franciscans.St Francis preached apostolic poverty and universal love; butwithin a few years of his death his followers were acting asrecruiting sergeants in a fierce war to defend the property of theChurch. The Emperor was defeated largely because he wasunable to clothe his cause in a garb of piety or morality.At the same time, the war measures adopted by the Popesduring this struggle made many men critical of the Papacy onmoral grounds. Of Innocent IV, the Pope with whom Frederickwas contending at the time of his death, the Cambridge MedievalHistory (Vol. VI, p. 176) says:His conception of the Papacy was more secular than any otherPope’s before him. He viewed his weakness as political and his46 priestly powerremedies were political. He used his spiritual powers constantlyto raise money, buy friends, injure foes, and by hisunscrupulousness he roused a disrespectful hostility to thePapacy everywhere. His dispensations were a scandal. In contemptof his spiritual duties and of local rights, he used theendowments of the Church as papal revenue and means ofpolitical rewards: there would be four papal nominees waitingone after another for a benefice. Bad appointments were a naturalconsequence of such a system; and, further, legateschosen for war and diplomacy would more likely than not bethoroughly worldly in character . . . Of the loss of prestige andspiritual influence occasioned by him Innocent wasunconscious. He had good intentions, but not good principles.Endowed with courage, with invincible resolution, with astuteness,his cold equanimity was seldom shaken by disaster orgood-fortune, and he patiently pursued his ends with a cunningfaithlessness which lowered the standards of the Church. Hisinfluence on events was enormous. He wrecked the Empire; hestarted the Papacy on its decline; he moulded the destinies ofItaly.The death of Innocent IV produced no change in papal policy.His successor Urban IV carried on the struggle, with completesuccess, against Frederick’s son Manfred, and won the support ofthe still rising capitalism of Italy, wherever it was wavering, byan interesting use of his authority in matters of morals, whichaffords a classic example of the transformation of propagandapower into economic power. Most of the bankers, owing to theirlarge transactions in collecting the papal revenue, were alreadyon the side of the Pope, but in some cities, for instance Siena,Ghibelline feeling was so strong that the bankers, at first, sidedwith Manfred. Wherever this happened, the Pope informed theBanks’ debtors that it was their Christian duty not to pay theirdebts, a pronouncement which the debtors readily accepted aspriestly power 47authoritative. Siena, as a result, lost the English trade. ThroughoutItaly, the bankers who escaped ruin were compelled by thispapal manoeuvre to become Guelphs.7But such means, though they could win the political supportof the bankers, could hardly increase their respect for the Pope’sclaims to divine authority.The whole of the period from the fall of the Western Empireto the end of the sixteenth century may be viewed as a contestbetween two traditions: that of imperial Rome, and that ofTeutonic aristocracy, the former embodied in the Church, thelatter in the State. The Holy Roman Emperors made an attempt toannex the tradition of imperial Rome, but failed. They themselves,with the exception of Frederick II, were too ignorant tounderstand the Roman tradition, while the political institutionof feudalism, with which they were familiar, was Germanic. Thelanguage of educated men—including those who served theEmperors—was pedantically derived from antiquity; law wasRoman, philosophy was Greek, but the customs, which wereTeutonic in origin, were not such as could be mentioned inpolite speech. There was the same sort of difficulty as a classicalscholar of the present day would find in describing in Latin theprocesses of modern industry. It was not until the Reformationand the adoption of modern languages in place of Latin that theTeutonic element in the civilisation of Western Europe foundadequate literary and intellectual expression.After the fall of the Hohenstaufen, the Church seemed, for afew decades, to have re-established the rule of Italy over theWestern world. Judged by money standards, this rule was at leastas firm as in the days of the Antonines—the revenue that flowedfrom England and Germany to Rome far exceeded what theRoman legions had been able to extract. But it was extorted bymeans of the reverence felt for the Papacy, not by force of arms.7 Cf. Cambridge Medieval History, Vol. VII, p. 182.48 priestly powerAs soon as the Popes moved to Avignon, however, they began tolose the respect which they had won during the three precedingcenturies. This was due not only to their complete subservienceto the King of France, but also to their participation in vast atrocities,such as the suppression of the Templars. King Philip IV, beingin financial difficulties, coveted the lands of this order. It wasdecided to accuse them, quite groundlessly, of heresy. With thehelp of the Pope, those who were in France were seized, tortureduntil they confessed that they had paid homage to Satan and spatupon the crucifix, etc., and then burnt in large numbers, whilethe King disposed of their property, not without pickings for thePope. Such deeds began the moral degeneration of the Papacy.The Great Schism made it still more difficult to reverence thePope, since no one knew which of the claimants was the legitimateone, and each claimant anathematised the other. Throughoutthe Great Schism, each of the two rivals showed an unedifyingtenacity of power, extending to repudiation of the most solemnoaths. In various countries, the State and the local Church, inunison, withdrew obedience from both Popes. At length itbecame clear that only a general council could end the trouble.The Council of Pisa, misguidedly, merely created a third Popewithout successfully getting rid of the other two, although itpronounced their deposition as heretics; the Council of Constanceat last succeeded in removing all three and restoringunity. But the struggle had destroyed the traditional reverencefor the Papacy. At the end of this period of confusion, it hadbecome possible for Wyclif to say of the Papacy:To get rid of such a demon would not harm the Church, butwould be useful to it; in working for his destruction, the Churchwould be working solicitously for the cause of God.The fifteenth-century Papacy, while it suited Italy, was tooworldly and secular, as well as too openly immoral, to satisfy thepriestly power 49piety of Northern countries. At last, in Teutonic countries, themoral revolt became strong enough to allow free play to economicmotives: there was a general refusal to pay tribute toRome, and princes and nobles seized the lands of the Church.But this would not have been possible without the doctrinalrevolt of Protestantism, which could never have taken place butfor the Great Schism and the scandals of the Renaissance Papacy.If the moral force of the Church had not been weakened fromwithin, its assailants could not have had moral force on theirside, and would have been defeated as Frederick II was defeated.It is interesting in this connection to observe what Machiavellihas to say on the subject of ecclesiastical principalities in ChapterXI of The Prince:It only remains now to speak of ecclesiastical principalities,touching which all difficulties are prior to getting possession,because they are acquired either by capacity or good fortune,and they can be held without either; for they are sustained bythe ancient ordinances of religion, which are so all-powerful,and of such a character, that the principalities may be held nomatter how their princes behave and live. These princes alonehave states and do not defend them, they have subjects and donot rule them; and the states, though unguarded, are not takenfrom them, and the subjects, though not ruled, do not care,and they have neither the desire nor the ability to alienatethemselves. Such principalities only are secure and happy. Butbeing upheld by power to which the human mind cannot reach,I shall speak no more of them, because, being exalted andmaintained by God, it would be the act of a presumptuous andrash man to discuss them.These words were written during the pontificate of LeoX, which was that in which the Reformation began. To piousGermans, it gradually became impossible to believe that the50 priestly powerruthless nepotism of Alexander VI, or the financial rapacity ofLeo, could be ‘exalted and maintained by God’. Luther, a ‘presumptuousand rash man’, was quite willing to enter upon thediscussion of the papal power, from which Machiavelli shrank.And as soon as there existed moral and theological support foropposition to the Church, motives of self-interest caused theopposition to spread with great rapidity. Since the power of theChurch had been based upon the power of the keys, it wasnatural that opposition should be associated with a new doctrineof Justification. Luther’s theology made it possible for lay princesto despoil the Church without fear of damnation, and without,incurring moral condemnation from their own subjects.While economic motives contributed greatly to the spread ofthe Reformation, they are obviously not sufficient to account forit, since they had been operative for centuries. Many Emperorstried to resist the Pope; so did sovereigns elsewhere, e.g. Henry IIand King John in England. But their attempts were thoughtwicked, and therefore failed. It was only after the Papacy had, fora long time, so abused its traditional powers as to cause a moralrevolt, that successful resistance became possible.The rise and decline of papal power are worthy of study byanyone who wishes to understand the winning of power by propaganda.It is not enough to say that men were superstitious andbelieved in the power of the keys. Throughout the Middle Agesthere were heresies, which would have spread, as Protestantismspread, if the Popes had not, on the whole, deserved respect. Andwithout heresy secular rulers made vigorous attempts to keepthe Church in subordination to the State, which failed in theWest though they succeeded in the East. For this there werevarious reasons.First, the Papacy was not hereditary, and was therefore nottroubled with long minorities, as secular kingdoms were. A mancould not easily rise to eminence in the Church except by piety,learning or statesmanship; consequently most Popes were menpriestly power 51considerably above the average in one or more respects. Secularsovereigns might happen to be able, but were often quite thereverse; moreover they had not the training in controlling theirpassions that ecclesiastics had. Repeatedly, kings got into difficultiesfrom desire for divorce, which, being a matter for theChurch, placed them at the mercy of the Pope. Sometimes theytried Henry VIII’s way of dealing with this difficulty, but theirsubjects were shocked, their vassals were liberated from theiroath of allegiance, and in the end they had to submit or fall.Another great strength of the Papacy was its impersonal continuity.In the contest with Frederick II, it is astonishing howlittle difference is made by the death of a Pope. There was a bodyof doctrine, and a tradition of statecraft, to which kings couldoppose nothing equally solid. It was only with the rise of nationalismthat secular governments acquired any comparable continuityor tenacity of purpose.In the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, kings, as arule, were ignorant, while most Popes were both learned andwell-informed. Moreover Kings were bound up with the feudalsystem, which was cumbrous, in constant danger of anarchy,and hostile to the newer economic forces. On the whole, duringthose centuries, the Church represented a higher civilisationthan that represented by the State.But by far the greatest strength of the Church was the moralrespect which it inspired. It inherited, as a kind of moral capital,the glory of the persecutions in ancient times. Its victories, as wehave seen, were associated with the enforcement of celibacy, andthe mediaeval mind found celibacy very impressive. Very manyecclesiastics, including not a few Popes, suffered great hardshipsrather than yield on a point of principle. It was clear to ordinarymen that, in a world of uncontrolled rapacity, licentiousness,and self-seeking, eminent dignitaries of the Church notinfrequently lived for impersonal aims, to which they willinglysubordinated their private fortune. In successive centuries, men52 priestly powerof impressive holiness—Hildebrand, St Bernard, St Francis—dazzled public opinion, and prevented the moral discredit thatwould otherwise have come from the misdeeds of others.But to an organisation which has ideal ends, and therefore anexcuse for love of power, a reputation for superior virtue isdangerous, and is sure, in the long run, to produce a superiorityonly in unscrupulous ruthlessness. The Church preached contemptfor the things of this world, and in doing so acquireddominion over monarchs. The Friars took a vow of poverty,which so impressed the world that it increased the alreadyenormous wealth of the Church. St Francis, by preachingbrotherly love, generated the enthusiasm required for the victoriousprosecution of a long and atrocious war. In the end, theRenaissance Church lost all the moral purpose to which it owedits wealth and power, and the shock of the Reformation wasnecessary to produce regeneration.All this is inevitable whenever superior virtue is used as ameans of winning tyrannical power for an organisation.Except when due to foreign conquest, the collapse of traditionalpower is always the result of its abuse by men whobelieve, as Machiavelli believed, that its hold on men’s minds istoo firm to be shaken even by the grossest crimes.In the United States at the present day, the reverence which theGreeks gave to oracles and the Middle Ages to the Pope is given tothe Supreme Court. Those who have studied the working of theAmerican Constitution know that the Supreme Court is part ofthe forces engaged in the protection of the plutocracy. But of themen who know this, some are on the side of the plutocracy, andtherefore do nothing to weaken the traditional reverence for theSupreme Court, while others are discredited in the eyes of ordinaryquiet citizens by being said to be subversive and Bolshevik.A considerable further career of obvious partisanship will benecessary before a Luther will be able to attack successfully theauthority of the official interpreters of the Constitution.priestly power 53Theological power is much less affected by defeat in war thansecular power. It is true that Russia and Turkey, after the GreatWar, suffered a theological as well as a political revolution, but inboth countries the traditional religion was very intimately connectedwith the State. The most important instance of theologicalsurvival in spite of defeat in war is the victory of theChurch over the barbarians in the fifth century. St Augustine, inthe City of God, which was inspired by the sack of Rome,explained that temporal power was not what was promised tothe true believer, and was therefore not to be expected as theresult of orthodoxy. The surviving pagans within the Empireargued that Rome was vanquished as a punishment for abandoningthe gods, but in spite of the plausibility of this contention itfailed to win any general support; among the invaders, thesuperior civilisation of the vanquished prevailed, and the victorsadopted the Christian faith. Thus through the medium of theChurch the influence of Rome survived among the barbarians,of whom none before Hitler succeeded in shaking off thetradition of ancient culture.54 priestly power5KINGLY POWERThe origin of kings, like that of priests, is prehistoric, and theearly stages in the evolution of kingship can only be conjecturedfrom what still exists among the most backward savages. Whenthe institution is fully developed, but has not yet begun todecline, the king is a man who leads his tribe or nation in war,who decides when to make war and when to make peace; often,though not always, he makes the laws and controls the administrationof justice. His title to the throne is usually in a greater orless degree hereditary. He is, moreover, a sacred person: if nothimself a god, he is at least the Lord’s anointed.But kingship of this sort presupposes a long evolution of government,and a community much more highly organised thanthose of savages. Even the savage chief, as most Europeansimagine him, is not to be found in really primitive societies. Theman whom we regard as a chief may have only religious andceremonial functions to perform; sometimes, like the LordMayor, he is only expected to give banquets. Sometimes hedeclares war, but takes no part in the fighting, because he is toosacred. Sometimes his mana is such that no subject may lookupon him; this effectually prevents him from taking much partin public business. He cannot make the laws, since they aredecided by custom; he is not needed for their administration,since, in a small community, punishment can be spontaneouslyadministered by neighbours. Some savage communities havetwo chiefs, one secular and one religious, like the Shogun andthe Mikado in old Japan—not like the Emperor and the Pope,since the religious chief has, as a rule, only ceremonial power.Among primitive savages generally, so much is decided by custom,and so little by formal government, that the prominentmen whom Europeans call chiefs have only faint beginnings ofkingly power.1Migration and foreign invasion are powerful forces in thedestruction of custom, and therefore in creating the need ofgovernment. At the lowest level of civilization at which there arerulers worthy to be called kings, the royal family is sometimes ofalien origin, and has won respect, initially, by some definitesuperiority. But whether this is a common or uncommon stagein the evolution of monarchy is a controversial question amonganthropologists.It is clear that war must have played a great part in increasingthe power of kings, since in war the need of a unified commandis obvious. To make the monarchy hereditary is the easiestway of avoiding the evils of a disputed succession; even ifthe king has the power of appointing his successor, he is prettysure to choose one of his family. But dynasties do not last forever, and every royal family begins with a usurper or foreignconqueror. Usually religion legitimises the new family bymeans of some traditional ceremony. Priestly power profits bythese occasions, since it comes to be an essential support of theroyal prestige. ‘No Bishop, no King,’ said Charles I, and the1 On this subject, see Rivers, Social Organization.56 kingly poweranalogue of this maxim has been true in all ages in whichkings have existed. The position of king appears to ambitiouspeople such a desirable one that only powerful religious sanctionswill make them renounce the hope of acquiring itthemselves.Whatever may have been the stages by which the primitivechief developed into the historical king, the process was alreadycompleted in Egypt and Babylonia at the earliest period of whichrecords exist. The Great Pyramid is considered to have been builtbefore 3000 .., and its construction would only have beenpossible for a monarch possessed of immense power over hissubjects. Babylonia, at this period, had a number of kings, nonehaving a territory comparable to that of Egypt; but they werevery completely rulers in their respective areas. Before the end ofthe third millennium .. we reach the great king Hammurabi(2123–2081 ..), who did all the things that a king should do.He is best known by his code of laws, which was given to him bythe sun-god, and shows that he succeeded in achieving whatmediaeval monarchs never could do, namely, subordinatingecclesiastical to civil courts. But he was also distinguished as asoldier and as an engineer. Patriotic poets sang the praises of hisconquests:For all time he his mighty strength hath shown,The mighty warrior, Hammurabi, king,Who smote the foe, a very storm in battle.Sweeping the lands of foemen, bringing war to nought,Giving rebellion surcease, and destroying,Like dolls of clay, malignants, hath laid openThe steeps of the impenetrable hills.He recorded himself his exploits in irrigation: ‘When Anuand Enlil [a god and goddess] gave me the lands of Sumer andAkkad to rule, and entrusted their sceptre to me, I dug the canalkingly power 57Hammurabi-the-abundance-of-the-people which bringeth water for thelands of Sumer and Akkad. The scattered people of Sumer andAkkad I gathered, with pasturage and watering I provided them;I pastured them with plenty and abundance, and settled them inpeaceful dwellings.’Kingship as an institution had reached its utmost limits ofdevelopment in Egypt at the time of the Great Pyramid and inBabylonia at the time of Hammurabi. Later kings have had largerterritories, but none have had more complete rule over theirkingdoms. The power of Egyptian and Babylonian kings wasended only by foreign conquest, not by internal rebellion. Theycould not, it is true, afford to quarrel with the priesthood, sincethe submission of their subjects depended upon the religioussignificance of the monarchy; but except in this respect theirauthority was unlimited.The Greeks, in most cities, got rid of their kings, as politicalrulers, at or before the beginning of the historical period. TheRoman kings are prehistoric, and the Romans retained,throughout their history, an unconquerable aversion to thename of king. The Roman Emperor, in the West, was never amonarch in the full sense of the word. His origin was extralegal,and he depended always upon the army. To civilians, hemight declare himself a god, but to the soldiers he remainedmerely a general who gave, or did not give, adequate donatives.Except occasionally for short periods, the Empire was not hereditary.The real power was always the army, and the Emperor wasmerely its nominee for the time being.The barbarian invasion reintroduced monarchy, but with adifference. The new kings were the chiefs of Germanic tribes,and their power was not absolute, but depended always upon thecooperation of some Council of Elders or kindred body. When aGermanic tribe conquered a Roman province, its chief becameking, but his most important companions became nobles with acertain measure of independence. Hence arose the feudal sys-58 kingly powertem, which left all the monarchs of Western Europe at the mercyof turbulent Barons.Monarchy consequently remained weak until it had got thebetter of both the Church and the feudal nobility. The causes ofthe weakening of the Church we have already considered. Thenobility was worsted in the struggle with the king, in Englandand France, because it was an obstacle to orderly government. InGermany its leaders developed into petty kings, with the resultthat Germany was at the mercy of France. In Poland, aristocraticanarchy continued until the partition. In England and France,after the Hundred Years War and the Wars of the Roses, ordinarycitizens were compelled to put their faith in a strong king.Edward IV became victorious by the help of the City of London,from which he even chose his Queen. Louis XI, the enemy of thefeudal aristocracy, was the friend of the higher bourgeoisie, whohelped him against the nobles while he helped them against theartisans. ‘He ruled like a great capitalist’, is the official verdict ofthe Encyclopaedia Britannica.The renaissance monarchies had one great advantage, as comparedwith earlier kings in their conflicts with the Church,namely that education was no longer a monopoly of ecclesiastics.The help of lay lawyers was invaluable in the establishmentof the new monarchy.The new monarchies, in England, France, and Spain, wereabove the Church and above the aristocracy. Their powerdepended upon the support of two growing forces, nationalismand commerce: so long as they were felt to be useful to thesetwo, they were strong, but when they failed in these respectsthere was revolution. The Tudors were faultless in both respects,but the Stuarts hampered trade by monopolies granted to courtiers,and allowed England to be dragged at the chariot wheels ofSpain first, and then France. The French monarchy favouredcommerce and enhanced national power until the end ofColbert’s régime. After that time, the Revocation of the Edict ofkingly power 59Nantes, a series of increasingly disastrous wars, crushing taxation,and the exemption of clergy and nobles from financialburdens, turned both commerce and nationalism against theking, and in the end brought about the Revolution. Spain wasdeflected by the conquest of the New World; but the SpanishNew World itself, when it rebelled, did so chiefly in order to beable to trade with England and the United States.Commerce, though it supported kings against feudal anarchy,has always been republican when it has felt sufficiently strong. Itwas so in antiquity, in the North Italian and Hanseatic cities ofthe Middle Ages, and in Holland during its greatest days. Thealliance between kings and commerce was therefore an uneasyone. Kings appealed to ‘divine right’, and sought, as far as possible,to make their power traditional and quasi-religious. In thisthey were partially successful: the execution of Charles I wasfelt to be an impiety, not merely an ordinary crime. In France,St Louis was erected into a legendary figure, some of whosepiety descended as a cloak even to Louis XV, who was still ‘themost Christian King’. Having created a new Court aristocracy,kings tended to prefer it to the bourgeoisie. In England, thehigher aristocracy and the bourgeoisie combined, and installed aking with a merely parliamentary title, who had none of the oldmagic properties of majesty: George I, for instance, could notcure the king’s evil, though Queen Anne could. In France, theking won over the aristocracy, and his and their heads felltogether under the guillotine.The alliance of commerce and nationalism, which began withthe Lombard League in the time of Frederick Barbarossa graduallyspread over Europe, achieving its last and briefest triumphin the Russian February Revolution. Wherever it won power, itturned against hereditary power based on land, at first in alliancewith the monarchy, and then in opposition to it. In the end,kings everywhere disappeared or were reduced to figure-heads.Now, at least, nationalism and commerce have parted company;60 kingly powerin Italy, Germany, and Russia it is nationalism that has triumphed.The Liberal movement, begun in Milan in the twelfthcentury, has run its course.Traditional power, when not destroyed from without, runs,almost always, through a certain development. Emboldened bythe respect which it inspires, it becomes careless as regards thegeneral approval, which it believes that it cannot ever lose. Bysloth, folly, or cruelty it gradually forces men to become scepticalof its claims to divine authority. Since these claims have nobetter source than habit, criticism, once aroused, easily disposesof them. Some new creed, useful to the rebels, takes the place ofthe old one; or sometimes, as in the case of Haiti when it wonfreedom from the French, mere chaos succeeds. As a rule, a longperiod of very flagrant misgovernment is necessary before mentalrebellion becomes widespread; and in many cases the rebelssucceed in transferring to themselves part or the whole of theold authority. So Augustus absorbed into himself the traditionaldignity of the Senate; Protestants retained the reverence for theBible, while rejecting reverence for the Catholic Church; theBritish Parliament gradually acquired the power of the king,without destroying the respect for monarchy.All these, however, were limited revolutions; those whichwere more thoroughgoing involved greater difficulties. The substitutionof the republican form of government for hereditarymonarchy, where it has been sudden, has usually led to variouskinds of trouble, since a new constitution has no hold overmen’s mental habits, and will only be respected, broadly speaking,in so far as it accords with self-interest. Ambitious men,therefore, will seek to become dictators, and will only desistafter a considerable period of failure. If there is no such period, arepublican constitution will fail to acquire that hold over men’sthoughts that is necessary for stability. The United States isalmost the only example of a new republic which has been stablefrom the beginning.kingly power 61The chief revolutionary movement of our time is the attack ofSocialism and Communism upon the economic power of privatepersons. We may expect to find here the common characteristicsof such movements, as exemplified, for example, in the rise ofChristianity, of Protestantism, and of political democracy. But onthis subject I shall have more to say at a later stage.62 kingly power6NAKED POWERAs the beliefs and habits which have upheld traditional powerdecay, it gradually gives way either to power based upon somenew belief, or to ‘naked’ power, i.e. to the kind that involves noacquiescence on the part of the subject. Such is the power of thebutcher over the sheep, of an invading army over a vanquishednation, and of the police over detected conspirators. The power ofthe Catholic Church over Catholics is traditional, but its powerover heretics who are persecuted is naked. The power of the Stateover loyal citizens is traditional, but its power over rebels is naked.Organisations that have a long career of power pass, as a rule,through three phases: first, that of fanatical but not traditionalbelief, leading to conquest; then, that of general acquiescence inthe new power, which rapidly becomes traditional; and finallythat in which power, being now used against those who rejecttradition, has again become naked. The character of an organisationchanges very greatly as it passes through these stages.The power conferred by military conquest often ceases, after alonger or shorter period of time, to be merely military. All theprovinces conquered by the Romans, except Judea, soon becameloyal subjects of the Empire, and ceased to feel any desire forindependence. In Asia and Africa the Christian countries conqueredby the Mohammedans submitted with little reluctance totheir new rulers. Wales gradually acquiesced in English rule,though Ireland did not. After the Albigensian heretics hadbeen overcome by military force, their descendants submittedinwardly as well as outwardly to the authority of the Church.The Norman Conquest produced, in England, a royal familywhich, after a time, was thought to possess a Divine Right to thethrone. Military conquest is stable only when it is followed bypsychological conquest, but the cases in which this has occurredare very numerous.Naked power, in the internal government of a community notlately submitted to foreign conquest, arises in two different setsof circumstances: first, where two or more fanatical creeds arecontending for mastery; secondly, where all traditional beliefshave decayed, without being succeeded by new ones, so thatthere are no limitations to personal ambition. The former kindof case is not pure, since the adherents of the dominant creed arenot subject to naked power. I shall consider it in the next chapter,under the head of revolutionary power. For the present I shallconfine myself to the second kind of case.The definition of naked power is psychological, and a governmentmay be naked in relation to some of its subjects but notin relation to others. The most complete examples known to me,apart from foreign conquest, are the later Greek tyrannies andsome of the States of Renaissance Italy.Greek history affords, as in a laboratory, a large numberof small-scale experiments of great interest to the student ofpolitical power. The hereditary kingship of the Homeric agecame to an end before the beginning of historical records, andwas succeeded by a hereditary aristocracy. At the point wherereliable history of Greek cities begins, there was a contest64 naked powerbetween aristocracy and tyranny. Except in Sparta, tyranny waseverywhere victorious for a time, but was succeeded either bydemocracy or by a restoration of aristocracy, sometimes in theform of plutocracy. This first age of tyranny covered the greaterpart of the seventh and sixth centuries .. It was not an ageof naked power, as was the later period with which I shall bespecially concerned; nevertheless, it prepared the way for thelawlessness and violence of later times.The word ‘tyrant’ did not, originally, imply any bad qualitiesin the ruler, but only an absence of legal or traditional title. Manyof the early tyrants governed wisely, and with the consent ofthe majority of their subjects. Their only implacable enemies, asa rule, were the aristocrats. Most of the early tyrants were veryrich men, who bought their way to power, and maintainedthemselves more by economic than by military means. They areto be compared rather with the Medici than with the dictators ofour day.The first age of tyranny was that in which coinage first cameinto use, and this had the same kind of effect in increasing thepower of rich men as credit and paper money have had inrecent times. It has been maintained1—with what truth I amnot competent to judge—that the introduction of currency wasconnected with the rise of tyranny; certainly the possession ofsilver mines was a help to any man who aimed at becoming atyrant. The use of money, when it is new, profoundly disturbsancient customs, as may be seen in the parts of Africa whichhave not been long under European control. In the seventh andsixth centuries .., the effect was to increase the power ofcommerce, and to diminish that of territorial aristocracies.Until the Persians acquired Asia Minor, wars in the Greek worldwere few and unimportant, and not much of the work of productionwas performed by slaves. The circumstances were ideal1 See P. N. Ure, The Origin of Tyranny.naked power 65for economic power, which weakened the hold of tradition inmuch the same way as industrialism did in the nineteenthcentury.So long as it was possible for everybody to be prosperous, theweakening of tradition did more good than harm. It led, amongthe Greeks, to the most rapid advance in civilisation that has everoccurred—with the possible exception of the last four centuries.The freedom of Greek art and science and philosophy is that of aprosperous age unhampered by superstition. But the social structurehad not the toughness required to resist misfortune, andindividuals had not the moral standards necessary for the avoidanceof disastrous crimes when virtue could no longer bringsuccess. A long series of wars diminished the free populationand increased the number of slaves. Greece proper finally fellunder the dominion of Macedonia, while Hellenic Sicily, in spiteof increasingly violent revolutions, civil wars, and tyrannies,continued to struggle against the power of Carthage, and thenof Rome. The Syracusan tyrannies deserve our attention, bothbecause they afford one of the most perfect examples of nakedpower, and because they influenced Plato, who quarrelled withthe elder Dionysius and endeavoured to make a pupil of theyounger. The views of later Greeks, and of all subsequent ages,on Greek tyrants in general, were largely influenced by theunfortunate contacts of the philosophers with Dionysius theelder and his successors in Syracusan misgovernment.‘The machinery of fraud,’ says Grote, ‘whereby the peoplewere to be cheated into a temporary submission as a prelude tothe machinery of force whereby such submission was to beperpetuated against their consent—was the stock in trade ofGrecian usurpers.’ How far the earlier tyrannies were perpetuatedwithout popular consent may be doubted, but of the latertyrannies, which were military rather than economic, this iscertainly true. Take, for example, Grote’s description, based onDiodorus, of the crucial moment in the rise of Dionysius the66 naked powerelder. The arms of Syracuse had suffered defeat and disgraceunder a more or less democratic régime, and Dionysius, thechosen leader of the champions of vigorous war, was demandingthe punishment of the defeated generals.Amidst the silence and disquietude which reigned in theSyracusan assembly, Dionysius was the first who rose toaddress them. He enlarged upon a topic suitable alike to thetemper of his auditors and to his own views. He vehementlydenounced the generals as having betrayed the security of Syracuseto the Carthaginians—and as the persons to whom theruin of Agrigentum, together with the impending peril of everyman around, was owing. He set forth their misdeeds, real andalleged, not merely with fulness and acrimony, but with a ferociousviolence outstripping all the limits of legitimate debate,and intended to bring upon them a lawless murder, like thedeath of the generals recently at Agrigentum. ‘There they sit,the Traitors! Do not wait for legal trial or verdict, but lay handsupon them at once, and inflict upon them summary justice.’Such a brutal exhortation . . . was an offence against law as wellas against parliamentary order. The presiding magistratesreproved Dionysius as a disturber of order, and fined him, asthey were empowered by law. But his partisans were loud in hissupport. Philistus not only paid down the fine for him on thespot, but publicly proclaimed that he would go on for the wholeday paying all similar fines which might be imposed—andincited Dionysius to persist in such language as he thoughtproper. That which had begun as illegality, was now aggravatedinto open defiance of the law. Yet so enfeebled was the authorityof the magistrates, and so vehement the cry against them, inthe actual position of the city that they were unable either topunish or repress the speaker. Dionysius pursued his haranguein a tone yet more inflammatory, not only accusing the generalsof having corruptly betrayed Agrigentum, but also denouncingnaked power 67the conspicuous and wealthy citizens generally, as oligarchswho had tyrannical sway—who treated the many with scorn,and made their own profit out of the misfortunes of the city.Syracuse (he contended) could never be saved, unless men of atotally different character were invested with authority; men,not chosen from wealth or station, but of humble birth, belongingto the people by position, and kind in their deportmentfrom consciousness of their own weakness.2And so he became tyrant; but history does not relate anyconsequent advantage to the poor and humble. True, he confiscatedthe estates of the rich, but it was to his bodyguard that hegave them. His popularity soon waned, but not his power. A fewpages further on we find Grote saying:Feeling more than ever that his dominion was repugnant tothe Syracusans, and rested only on naked force, he thus surroundedhimself with precautions probably stronger than anyother Grecian despot had ever accumulated.Greek history is peculiar in the fact that, except in Sparta,the influence of tradition was extraordinarily weak in Greece;moreover there was almost no political morality. Herodotusstates that no Spartan could resist a bribe. Throughout Greece, itwas useless to object to a politician on the ground that he tookbribes from the King of Persia, because his opponents also didso if they became sufficiently powerful to be worth buying.The result was a universal scramble for personal power, conductedby corruption, street fighting, and assassination. In thisbusiness, the friends of Socrates and Plato were among the mostunscrupulous. The final outcome, as might have been foreseen,was subjugation by foreign Powers.2 G. Grote, History of Greece, Ch. LXXXI.68 naked powerIt used to be customary to lament the loss of Greek independence,and to think of the Greeks as all Solons and Socrateses.How little reason there was to deplore the victory of Rome maybe seen from the history of Hellenic Sicily. I know no betterillustration of naked power than the career of Agathocles, a contemporaryof Alexander the Great, who lived from 361 to 289.., and was tyrant of Syracuse during the last twenty-eightyears of his life.Syracuse was the largest of Greek cities, perhaps the largestcity in the Mediterranean. Its only rival was Carthage, withwhich there was always war except for a short time after a seriousdefeat of either party. The other Greek cities in Sicily sidedsometimes with Syracuse, sometimes with Carthage, accordingto the turns of party politics. In every city, the rich favouredoligarchy and the poor favoured democracy; when the partisansof democracy were victorious, their leader usually succeededin making himself a tyrant. Many of the beaten party becameexiles, and joined the armies of those cities in which their partywas in power. But the bulk of the armed forces consisted ofmercenaries, largely non-Hellenic.Agathocles3 was a man of humble origin, the son of a potter.Owing to his beauty he became the favourite of a rich Sycracusannamed Demas, who left him all his money, and whosewidow he married. Having distinguished himself in war, he wasthought to be aspiring to the tyranny; he was accordingly exiled,and orders were given that he should be murdered on his journey.But he, having foreseen this, changed clothes with a poorman, who was murdered in error by the hired assassins. Hethen raised an army in the interior of Sicily, which so terrifiedthe Sycracusans that they made a treaty with him: he was3 What follows rests on the authority of Diodorus Siculus. Some modernauthorities say that he was biased, and that Agathocles was an admirable ruler.But it is difficult to believe that Diodorus is not correct as to the main facts.naked power 69readmitted, and swore in the temple of Ceres that he would donothing to the prejudice of the democracy.The government of Syracuse at this time seems to have beena mixture of democracy and oligarchy. There was a council ofsix hundred, consisting of the richest men. Agathoclesespoused the cause of the poor against these oligarchs. In thecourse of a conference with forty of them, he roused the soldiersand had all the forty murdered, saying there was a plotagainst him. He then led the army into the city, telling them toplunder all the six hundred; they did so, and massacred citizenswho came out of their houses to see what was happening; inthe end, large numbers were murdered for booty. As Diodorussays: ‘Nay, there was no safety even to them that fled to thetemples under the shelter of the gods; but piety towards thegods was crushed and borne down by the cruelty of men: andthese things Greeks against Greeks in their own country, andkindred against kindred in a time of peace, without any regardeither to the laws of nature, or leagues, or reverence to thegods, dared thus audaciously to commit: upon which accountnot only friends, but even enemies themselves, and every soberman, could not but pity the miserable condition of these distressedpeople.’Those of Agathocles’s party spent the day-time slaughteringthe men, and at nightfall turned their attention to the women.After two days’ massacre, Agathocles brought forth theprisoners and killed all but his friend Dinocrates. He then calledthe assembly, accused the oligarchs, and said he would purge thecity of all friends of monarchy, and himself would live a privatelife. So he stripped off his uniform and dressed in mufti. Butthose who had robbed under his leadership wanted him inpower, and he was voted sole general. ‘Many of the poorer sort,of those that were in debt, were much pleased with this revolution,’for Agathocles promised remission of debts and sharingout of lands to the poor. Then he was mild for a time.70 naked powerIn war, Agathocles was resourceful and brave, but rash. Therecame a moment when it seemed as if the Carthaginans mustbe completely victorious; they were besieging Syracuse, andtheir navy occupied the harbour. But Agathocles, with a largearmy, sailed to Africa, where he burnt his ships to prevent themfrom falling into the hands of the Carthaginians. For fear ofrevolt in his absence, he took children as hostages; and after atime his brother, who was representing him in Syracuse, exiledeight thousand political opponents, whom the Carthaginiansbefriended. In Africa he was at first amazingly successful; hecaptured Tunis, and besieged Carthage, where the governmentbecame alarmed, and set to work to propitiate Moloch. Itwas found that aristocrats whose children ought to have beensacrificed to the god had been in the habit of purchasing poorchildren as substitutes; the practice was now sternly repressed,since Moloch was known to be more gratified by the sacrificeof aristocratic children. After this reform the fortunes of theCarthaginians began to mend.Agathocles, feeling the need of reinforcements, sent envoys toCyrene, which was at that time held, under Ptolemy, by Ophelas,one of Alexander’s captains. The envoys were instructed to saythat, with the help of Ophelas, Carthage could be destroyed; thatAgathocles wished only to be secure in Sicily, and had no Africanambitions; and that all their joint conquests in Africa should bethe share of Ophelas. Tempted by these offers, Ophelas marchedacross the desert with his army, and after great hardship effecteda junction with Agathocles. Agathocles thereupon murderedhim, and pointed out to his army that their only hope of safetywas to take service under the murderer of their late commander.He then besieged Utica, where, arriving unexpectedly, he capturedthree hundred prisoners in the fields; these he bound to thefront of his siege engines, so that the Uticans, to defend themselves,had to kill their own people. Although successful in thisenterprise, his position was difficult, the more so as he had reasonnaked power 71to fear that his son Archagathus was stirring up disaffection in thearmy. So he fled secretly back to Sicily, and the army, in fury athis desertion, murdered both Archagathus and his other son.This so enraged him that he killed every man, woman, and childin Syracuse that was related to any soldier in the mutinous army.His power in Sicily, for some time, survived all these vicissitudes.He took Aegesta, killed all the poorer males in that city,and tortured the rich till they revealed where their wealth wasconcealed. The young women and children he sold as slaves tothe Bruttii on the mainland.His home life, I regret to say, was not altogether happy. Hiswife had an affair with his son, one of his two grandsons murderedthe other, and then induced a servant of the old tyrant topoison grandpapa’s toothpick. The last act of Agathocles, whenhe saw he must die, was to summon the senate and demandvengeance on his grandson. But his gums, owing to the poison,became so sore that he could not speak. The citizens rose, he washurried on to his funeral pyre before he was dead, his goodswere confiscated, and we are told that democracy was restored.Renaissance Italy presents a very close parallel to ancientGreece, but the confusion is even greater. There were oligarchicalcommercial republics, tyrannies, after the Greek model, principalitiesof feudal origin, and, in addition, the States of theChurch. The Pope, except in Italy, commanded reverence, but hissons did not, and Cesare Borgia had to rely upon naked power.Cesare Borgia and his father Alexander VI are important, notonly on their own account, but as having inspired Machiavelli.One incident in their career, with Creighton’s comments, willserve to illustrate their age. The Colonna and Orsini had been thebane of the Popes for centuries; the Colonna had already fallen,but the Orsini remained. Alexander VI made a treaty with them,and invited their chief, Cardinal Orsini, to the Vatican, on hearingthat Cesare had captured two important Orsini by treachery.Cardinal Orsini was arrested as soon as he came into the Pope’s72 naked powerpresence; his mother paid the Pope two thousand ducats for theprivilege of sending him food, and his mistress presented HisHoliness with a costly pearl which he had coveted. NeverthelessCardinal Orsini died in prison—of poisoned wine given by theorders of Alexander VI, it was said. Creighton’s comments on thisoccurrence4 illustrate the character of a régime of naked power:It is amazing that this treacherous deed should have awakenedno remonstrances, and should have been so completely successful;but in the artificial politics of Italy everything dependedon the skill of the players of the game. The condottieri representedonly themselves, and when they were removed by anymeans, however treacherous, nothing remained. There was noparty, no interest, which was outraged by the fall of the Orsiniand Vitellozzo. The armies of the condottieri were formidableso long as they followed their generals; when the generals wereremoved, the soldiers dispersed and entered into otherengagements . . . Most men admired Cesare’s consummatecoolness in the matter . . . No outrage was done to currentmorality . . . Most men in Italy accepted as sufficient Cesare’sremark to Machiavelli: ‘It is well to beguile those who haveshown themselves masters of treachery.’ Cesare’s conduct wasjudged by its success.In Renaissance Italy, as in ancient Greece, a very high levelof civilisation was combined with a very low level of morals:both ages exhibit the greatest heights of genius and the greatestdepths of scoundrelism, and in both the scoundrels and themen of genius are by no means antagonistic to each other.Leonardo erected fortifications for Cesare Borgia; some of thepupils of Socrates were among the worst of the thirty tyrants;Plato’s disciples were mixed up in shameful doings in Sycracuse,4 M. Creighton, History of the Papacy, Vol. V, p. 42.naked power 73and Aristotle married a tyrant’s niece. In both ages, after art,literature, and murder had flourished side by side for about ahundred and fifty years, all were extinguished together by lesscivilised but more cohesive nations from the West and North.In both cases the loss of political independence involved notonly cultural decay, but loss of commercial supremacy andcatastrophic impoverishment.Periods of naked power are usually brief. They end, as a rule,in one or other of three ways. The first is foreign conquest, as inthe cases of Greece and Italy which we have already considered.The second is the establishment of a stable dictatorship, whichsoon becomes traditional; of this the most notable instance is theempire of Augustus, after the period of civil wars from Marius tothe defeat of Antony. The third is the rise of a new religion,using the word in its widest sense. Of this, an obvious instance isthe way in which Mohammed united the previously warringtribes of Arabia. The reign of naked force in international relationsafter the Great War might have been ended by the adoptionof communism throughout Europe, if Russia had had anexportable surplus of food.Where power is naked, not only internationally, but in theinternal government of single States, the methods of acquiringpower are far more ruthless than they are elsewhere. This subjecthas been treated, once for all, by Machiavelli. Take, for example,his laudatory account of Cesare Borgia’s measures to protecthimself in case of the death of Alexander VI:He decided to act in four ways. Firstly, by exterminating thefamilies of those lords whom he had despoiled, so as to takeaway that pretext from the Pope. Secondly, by winning to himselfall the gentlemen of Rome, so as to be able to curb thePope with their aid. Thirdly, by converting the college more tohimself. Fourthly, by acquiring so much power before the Popeshould die that he could by his own measures resist the first74 naked powershock. Of these four things, at the death of Alexander, he hadaccomplished three. For he had killed as many of the dispossessedlords as he could lay hands on, and few had escaped,[etc.]The second, third, and fourth of these methods might beemployed at any time, but the first would shock public opinionin a period of orderly government. A British Prime Ministercould not hope to consolidate his position by murdering theLeader of the Opposition. But where power is naked such moralrestraints become inoperative.Power is naked when its subjects respect it solely because it ispower, and not for any other reason. Thus a form of powerwhich has been traditional becomes naked as soon as the traditionceases to be accepted. It follows that periods of free thoughtand vigorous criticism tend to develop into periods of nakedpower. So it was in Greece, and so it was in Renaissance Italy.The theory appropriate to naked power has been stated byPlato in the first book of the Republic, through the mouth ofThrasymachus, who gets annoyed with Socrates for his amiableattempts to find an ethical definition of justice. ‘My doctrine is,’says Thrasymachus, ‘that justice is simply the interest of thestronger’. He proceeds:Each government has its laws framed to suit its own interests; ademocracy making democratical laws; an autocrat despoticlaws, and so on. Now by this procedure these governments havepronounced that what is for the interest of themselves is just fortheir subjects; and whoever deviates from this, is chastised bythem as guilty of illegality and injustice. Therefore, my good sir,my meaning is, that in all cities the same thing, namely, theinterest of the established government, is just. And superiorstrength I presume is to be found on the side of the government.So that the conclusion of right reasoning is that the same thing,namely, the interest of the stronger, is everywhere just.naked power 75Whenever this view is generally accepted, rulers cease to besubject to moral restraints, since what they do in order to retainpower is not felt to be shocking except to those who sufferdirectly. Rebels, equally, are only restrained by the fear of failure;if they can succced, by ruthless means, they need not be afraidthat this ruthlessness will make them unpopular.The doctrine of Thrasymachus, where it is generally accepted,makes the existence of an orderly community entirely dependentupon the direct physical force at the disposal of the government.It thus makes a military tyranny inevitable. Other forms ofgovernment can only be stable where there is some widespreadbelief which inspires respect for the existing distribution ofpower. Beliefs which have been successful in this respect haveusually been such as cannot stand against intellectual criticism.Power has at various times been limited, with general consent, toroyal families, to aristocrats, to rich men, to men as opposed towomen, and to white men as opposed to those with other pigmentations.But the spread of intelligence among subjects hascaused them to reject such limitations, and the holders of powerhave been obliged either to yield or to rely upon naked force. Iforderly government is to command general consent, some waymust be found of persuading a majority of mankind to agreeupon some doctrine other than that of Thrasymachus.I postpone to a later chapter the consideration of methods ofwinning general consent to a form of government otherwisethan by superstition, but a few preliminary remarks will beappropriate at this stage. In the first place, the problem is notessentially insoluble, since it has been solved in the United States.(It can hardly be said to have been solved in Great Britain, sincerespect for the Crown has been an essential element in Britishstability.) In the second place, the advantages of orderly governmentmust be generally realised; this will usually involve theexistence of opportunities for energetic men to become rich orpowerful by constitutional means. Where some class containing76 naked powerindividuals of energy and ability is debarred from desirablecareers, there is an element of instability which is likely to leadto rebellion sooner or later. In the third place, there will be needof some social convention deliberately adopted in the interests oforder, and not so flagrantly unjust as to arouse widespreadopposition. Such a convention, if successful for a time, will soonbecome traditional, and will have all the strength that belongs totraditional power.Rousseau’s ‘Social Contract’, to a modern reader, does notseem very revolutionary, and it is difficult to see why it was soshocking to governments. The chief reason is, I think, that itsought to base governmental power upon a convention adoptedon rational grounds, and not upon superstitious reverence formonarchs. The effect of Rousseau’s doctrines upon the worldshows the difficulty of causing men to agree upon some nonsuperstitiousbasis for government. Perhaps this is not possiblewhen superstition is swept away very suddenly: some practice involuntary co-operation is necessary as a preliminary training.The great difficulty is that respect for law is essential to socialorder, but is impossible under a traditional régime which nolonger commands assent, and is necessarily disregarded in a revolution.But although the problem is difficult it must be solvedif the existence of orderly communities is to be compatible withthe free exercise of intelligence.The nature of this problem is sometimes misapprehended. Itis not sufficient to find, in thought, a form of governmentwhich, to the theorist, appears to afford no adequate motive forrevolt; it is necessary to find a form of government which canbe actually brought into existence, and further, if it exists, willcommand sufficient loyalty to be able to suppress or preventrevolution. This is a problem of practical statesmanship, inwhich account must be taken of all the beliefs and prejudicesof the population concerned. There are those who believe thatalmost any group of men, when once it has seized thenaked power 77machinery of the State, can, by means of propaganda, securegeneral acquiescence. There are, however, obvious limitations tothis doctrine. State propaganda has, in recent times, provedpowerless when opposed to national feeling, as in India and(before 1921) in Ireland. It has difficulty in prevailing againststrong religious feeling. How far, and for how long, it can prevailagainst the self-interest of the majority, is still a doubtfulquestion. It must be admitted, however, that State propagandabecomes steadily more effective; the problem of securingacquiescence is therefore becoming easier for governments.The questions we have been raising will be considered morefully at later stages; for the present, they are merely to be bornein mind.I have spoken hitherto of political power, but in the economicsphere naked power is at least equally important. Marx regardedall economic relations, except in the socialist community of thefuture, as entirely governed by naked power. Per contra, the lateÉlie Halévy, the historian of Benthamism, once maintained that,broadly speaking, what a man is paid for his work is what hehimself believes it to be worth. I am sure this is not true ofauthors: I have always found, in my own case, that the more Ithought a book was worth, the less I was paid for it. And ifsuccessful business men really believe that their work is worthwhat it brings in, they must be even stupider than they seem.None the less, there is an element of truth in Halévy’s theory. Ina stable community, there must be no considerable class with aburning sense of injustice; it is therefore to be supposed that,where there is no great economic discontent, most men do notfeel themselves grossly underpaid. In undeveloped communities,in which a man’s livelihood depends upon status rather thanupon contract, he will, as a rule, consider that whatever is customaryis just. But even then Halévy’s formula inverts cause andeffect: the custom is the cause of man’s feeling as to what is just,and not vice versa. In this case, economic power is traditional; it78 naked poweronly becomes naked when old customs are upset, or, for somereason, become objects of criticism.In the infancy of industrialism, there were no customs toregulate the wages that should be paid, and the employees werenot yet organised. Consequently the relation of employer andemployed was one of naked power, within the limits allowed bythe State; and at first these limits were very wide. The orthodoxeconomists had taught that the wages of unskilled labour mustalways tend to fall to subsistence level, but they had not realisedthat this depended upon the exclusion of wage-earners frompolitical power and from the benefits of combination. Marx sawthat the question was one of power, but I think he underestimatedpolitical as compared with economic power. Tradeunions, which immeasurably increase the bargaining power ofwage-earners, can be suppressed if wage-earners have no sharein political power; a series of legal decisions would have crippledthem in England but for the fact that, from 1868 onward, urbanworking men had votes. Given trade union organisation, wagesare no longer determined by naked power, but by bargaining, asin the purchase and sale of commodities.The part played by naked power in economics is much greaterthan it was thought to be before the influence of Marx hadbecome operative. In certain cases, this is obvious. The bootyextracted by a highwayman from his victim, or by a conquerorfrom a vanquished nation, is obviously a matter of naked power.So is slavery, when the slave does not acquiesce from long habit. Apayment is extorted by naked power, if it has to be made in spiteof the indignation of the person making it. Such indignationexists in two classes of cases: where the payment is not customary,and where, owing to a change of outlook, what is customary hascome to be thought unjust. Formerly, a man had complete controlof the property of his wife, but the feminist movementcaused a revolt against this custom, which led to a change in thelaw. Formerly, employers had no liability for accidents to theirnaked power 79employees; here, also, sentiment changed, and brought about analteration in the law. Examples of this kind are innumerable.A wage-earner who is a Socialist may feel it unjust that hisincome is less than that of his employer; in that case, it is nakedpower that compels him to acquiesce. The old system of economicinequality is traditional, and does not, in itself, rouseindignation, except in those who are in revolt against the tradition.Thus every increase of socialistic opinion makes the powerof the capitalist more naked; the case is analogous to that ofheresy and the power of the Catholic Church. There are, as wehave seen, certain evils that are inherent in naked power, asopposed to power which wins acquiescence; consequently everyincrease in socialist opinion tends to make the power of capitalistsmore harmful, except in so far as the ruthlessness of itsexercise may be mitigated by fear. Given a community completelyon the Marxist pattern, in which all wage-earners wereconvinced socialists and all others were equally convincedupholders of the capitalist system, the victorious party, whicheverit might be, would have no escape from the exercise ofnaked force towards its opponents. This situation, which Marxprophesied, would be a very grave one. The propaganda of hisdisciples, in so far as it is successful, is tending to bring it about.Most of the great abominations in human history are connectedwith naked power—not only those associated with war,but others equally terrible if less spectacular. Slavery and the slavetrade, the exploitation of the Congo, the horrors of early industrialism,cruelty to children, judicial torture, the criminal law,prisons, workhouses, religious persecution, the atrocious treatmentof the Jews, the merciless frivolities of despots, theunbelievable iniquity of the treatment of political opponents inGermany and Russia at the present day—all these are examples ofthe use of naked power against defenceless victims.Many forms of unjust power which are deeply rooted intradition must at one time have been naked. Christian wives, for80 naked powermany centuries, obeyed their husbands because St Paul saidthey should; but the story of Jason and Medea illustrates thedifficulties that men must have had before St Paul’s doctrine wasgenerally accepted by women.There must be power, either that of governments, or that ofanarchic adventurers. There must even be naked power, so longas there are rebels against governments, or even ordinarycriminals. But if human life is to be, for the mass of mankind,anything better than a dull misery punctuated with moments ofsharp horror, there must bar as little naked power as possible.The exercise of power, if it is to be something better than theinfliction of wanton torture, must be hedged round by safeguardsof law and custom, permitted only after due deliberation,and entrusted to men who are closely supervised in the interestsof those who are subjected to them.I do not pretend that this is easy. It involves, for one thing, theelimination of war, for all war is an exercise of naked power. Itinvolves a world free from those intolerable oppressions thatgive rise to rebellions. It involves the raising of the standard oflife throughout the world, and particularly in India, China, andJapan, to at least the level which had been reached in the UnitedStates before the depression. It involves some institution analogousto the Roman tribunes, not for the people as a whole, butfor every section that is liable to oppression, such as minoritiesand criminals. It involves, above all, a watchful public opinion,with opportunities of ascertaining the facts.It is useless to trust in the virtue of some individual or set ofindividuals. The philosopher king was dismissed long ago as anidle dream, but the philosopher party, though equally fallacious,is hailed as a great discovery. No real solution of the problem ofpower is to be found in irresponsible government by a minority,or in any other short cut. But the further discussion of thismatter must be left for a later chapter.naked power 817REVOLUTIONARY POWERA traditional system, we observed, may break up in two differentways. It may happen that the creeds and mental habits uponwhich the old régime was based give way to mere scepticism; inthat case, social cohesion can only be preserved by the exerciseof naked power. Or it may happen that a new creed, involvingnew mental habits, acquires an increasing hold over men, and atlast becomes strong enough to substitute a government in harmonywith the new convictions in place of the one which is feltto have become obsolete. In this case the new revolutionarypower has characteristics which are different both from traditionaland from naked power. It is true that, if the revolution issuccessful, the system which it establishes soon becomes traditional;it is true, also, that the revolutionary struggle, if it issevere and prolonged, often degenerates into a struggle fornaked power. Nevertheless, the adherents of a new creed arepsychologically very different from ambitious adventurers, andtheir effects are apt to be both more important and morepermanent.I shall illustrate revolutionary power by considering fourexamples: (I) Early Christianity; (II) The Reformation; (III) TheFrench Revolution and Nationalism; (IV) Socialism and theRussian Revolution.I. Early Christianity. I am concerned with Christianity only as itaffected power and social organisation, not, except incidentally,on the side of personal religion.Christianity was, in its earliest days, entirely unpolitical. Thebest representatives of the primitive tradition in our time arethe Christadelphians, who believe the end of the world to beimminent, and refuse to have any part or lot in secular affairs.This attitude, however, is only possible to a small sect. As thenumber of Christians increased and the Church grew morepowerful, it was inevitable that a desire to influence the Stateshould grow up. Diocletian’s persecution must have very muchstrengthened this desire. The motives of Constantine’s conversionremain more or less obscure, but it is evident that theywere mainly political, which implies that the Church hadbecome politically influential. The difference between theteachings of the Church and the traditional doctrines of theRoman State was so vast that the revolution which took place atthe time of Constantine must be reckoned the most importantin known history.In relation to power, the most important of Christiandoctrines was: ‘We ought to obey God rather than man.’ Thiswas a precept to which nothing analogous had previouslyexisted, except among the Jews. There were, it is true, religiousduties, but they did not conflict with duty to the State exceptamong Jews and Christians. Pagans were willing to acquiescein the cult of the Emperor, even when they regarded hisclaim to divinity as wholly devoid of metaphysical truth. To theChristians, on the contrary, metaphysical truth was of theutmost moment: they believed that if they performed an actrevolutionary power 83of worship to any but the one true God they incurred the riskof damnation, to which martyrdom was preferable as thelesser evil.The principle that we ought to obey God rather than man hasbeen interpreted by Christians in two different ways. God’scommands may be conveyed to the individual conscience eitherdirectly, or indirectly through the medium of the Church. Noone except Henry VIII and Hegel has ever held, until our ownday, that they could be conveyed through the medium of theState. Christian teaching has thus involved a weakening of theState, either in favour of the right of private judgement, orin favour of the Church. The former, theoretically, involvesanarchy; the latter involves two authorities, Church and State,with no clear principle according to which their spheres are tobe delimited. Which are the things that are Caesar’s and whichare the things that are God’s? To a Christian it is surely natural tosay that all things are God’s. The claims of the Church, therefore,are likely to be such as the State will find intolerable. The conflictbetween the Church and the State has never been theoreticallyresolved, and continues down to the present day in such mattersas education.It might have been supposed that the conversion of Constantinewould lead to harmony between Church and State. This,however, was not the case. The first Christian Emperors wereArians, and the period of orthodox Emperors in the Westwas very brief, owing to the incursions of the Arian Gothsand Vandals. Later, when the adherence of the Eastern Emperorsto the Catholic Faith had become unquestionable, Egypt wasmonophysite and much of Western Asia was Nestorian. Theheretics in these countries welcomed the followers of theProphet, as being less persecuting than the Byzantine government.As against the Christian State, the Church was everywherevictorious in these many contests; only the new religion of Islamgave the State power to dominate the Church.84 revolutionary powerThe nature of the conflict between the Church and the ArianEmpire of the late fourth century is illustrated by the strugglebetween the Empress Justina and Saint Ambrose, Archbishop ofMilan, in the year 385. Her son Valentinian was a minor, andshe was acting as regent; both were Arians. Being in Milan duringHoly Week, the Empress ‘was persuaded, that a Romanemperor might claim, in his own dominions, the public exerciseof his religion; and she proposed to the Archbishop, as amoderate and reasonable concession, that he should resign theuse of a single church, either in the city or suburbs of Milan. Butthe conduct of Ambrose was governed by very different principles.The palaces of the earth might indeed belong to Caesar;but the churches were the houses of God; and, within the limitsof his diocese, he himself, as the lawful successor of the apostles,was the only minister of God. The privileges of Christianity,temporal as well as spiritual, were confined to the true believers;and the mind of Ambrose was satisfied that his own theologicalopinions were the standard of truth and orthodoxy. The archbishop,who refused to hold any conference, or negotiation,with the instruments of Satan, declared, with modest firmness,his resolution to die a martyr, rather than yield to the impioussacrilege.’1It soon appeared, however, that he had no need to fear martyrdom.When he was summoned before the Council, he wasfollowed by a vast and angry mob of supporters, who threatenedto invade the palace and perhaps kill the Empress and her son.The Gothic mercenaries, through Arian, hesitated to act againstso holy a man, and to avoid revolution the Empress was obligedto give way. ‘The mother of Valentinian could never forgive thetriumph of Ambrose; and the royal youth uttered a passionateexclamation, that his own servants were ready to betray him intothe hands of an insolent priest’ (ibid.).1 E. Gibbon, Ch. XXVII.revolutionary power 85In the following year (386) the Empress again attempted toovercome the Saint. An edict of banishment was pronouncedagainst him. But he took refuge in the cathedral, where hewas supported, day and night, by the faithful and the recipientsof ecclesiastical charity. To keep them awake, he ‘introducedinto the church of Milan the useful institution of aloud and regular psalmody’. The zeal of his followers wasfurther reinforced by miracles, and in the end ‘the feeble sovereignof Italy found himself unable to contend with thefavourite of heaven’.Such contests, of which there were many, established theindependent power of the Church. Its victory was due partly toalms-giving, partly to organisation, but mainly to the fact that novigorous creed or sentiment was opposed to it. While Rome wasconquering, a Roman could feel strongly about the glory of theState, because it gratified his imperial pride; but in the fourthcentury this sentiment had been long extinct. Enthusiasm for theState, as a force comparable with religion, revived only with therise of nationalism in modern times.Every successful revolution shakes authority and makessocial cohesion more difficult. So it was with the revolutionthat gave power to the Church. Not only did it greatly weakenthe State, but it set the pattern for subsequent revolutions.Moreover, the individualism, which had been an importantelement of Christian teaching in its early days, remained as adangerous source of both theological and secular rebellion.The individual conscience, when it could not accept the verdictof the Church, was able to find support in the Gospels fora refusal to submit. Heresy might be annoying to the Church,but was not, as such, contrary to the spirit of primitiveChristianity.This difficulty is inherent in every authority that owes itsorigin to revolution. It must maintain that the original revolutionwas justified, and it cannot, logically, contend that all86 revolutionary powersubsequent revolutions must be wicked.2 The anarchic fire inChristianity remained alive, though deeply buried, throughoutthe Middle Ages; at the Reformation, it suddenly shot up into agreat conflagration.II. The Reformation. From the point of view of power, the Reformationhas two aspects that concern us: on the one hand, its theologicalanarchism weakened the Church; on the other hand, byweakening the Church it strengthened the State. The Reformationwas chiefly important as the partial destruction of a greatinternational organisation, which had repeatedly proved itselfstronger than any secular government. Luther, in order to succeedagainst the Church and the extremists, was obliged to relyupon the support of secular princes;3 the Lutheran Church never,2 The attempt to do so sometimes has strange results. The young in Russia atthe present day are carefully sheltered from laudatory accounts of the revolutionarymovement in Tsarist days. The Letter of an Old Bolshevik (George Allen &Unwin), after telling of a supposed plot by some students to murder Stalin,continues: ‘From the accused students, threads were drawn to professors of politicalscience and party history. It is easy to find pages in any lectures on the history of theRussian revolutionary movement highly conducive nowadays to the cultivationof critical attitudes in respect to the Government, and young hotheads alwayslike to buttress their conclusions concerning the present by citing facts whichthey have been taught in school to regard as officially established. All Agranovhad to do was to pick the professors who, in his opinion, were to be regardedas fellow conspirators. This was how the first batch of defendants in the trial of thesixteen was recruited.’3 ‘The Peasants’ War,’ says Tawney in Religion and the Rise of Capitalism, ‘with itstouching appeal to the Gospel and its frightful catastrophe, not only terrifiedLuther into his outburst: “Whoso can, strike, smite, strangle, or stab, secretly orpublicly . . . such wonderful times are these that a prince can better meritHeaven with bloodshed than another with prayer”; it also helped to stamp onLutheranism an almost servile reliance on the secular authorities.’ A few pageslater he quotes another saying of Luther’s: ‘No one need think that the worldcan be ruled without blood. The civil sword shall and must be red and bloody.’Tawney’s comment is as follows: ‘Thus the axe takes the place of the stake, andrevolutionary power 87until the time of Hitler, showed any disloyalty to governmentsthat were not Catholic. The peasants’ revolt gave Luther anotherreason for preaching submission to princes. The Church, asan independent power, practically ceased to exist in Lutherancountries, and became part of the machinery for preachingsubmission to the secular government.In England, Henry VIII took the matter in hand with characteristicvigour and ruthlessness. By declaring himself Head of theChurch of England, he set to work to make religion secular andnational. He had no wish that the religion of England should bepart of the universal religion of Christendom; he wished Englishreligion to minister to his glory rather than to the glory of God.By means of subservient Parliaments, he could alter dogmas ashe chose; and he had no difficulty in executing those who dislikedhis alterations. The dissolution of the monasteries broughthim revenue, which enabled him easily to destroy such Catholicinsurrections as the Pilgrimage of Grace. Gunpowder and theWars of the Roses had weakened the old feudal aristocracy,whose heads he cut off whenever he felt so disposed. Wolsey,who relied upon the ancient power of the Church, fell;Cromwell and Cranmer were Henry’s subservient tools. Henrywas a pioneer, who first showed the world what, in the eclipse ofthe Church, the power of the State could be.The work of Henry VIII might not have been permanent, butfor the fact that, under Elizabeth, a form of nationalism associatedwith Protestantism became at once necessary and lucrative.Self-preservation demanded the defeat of Catholic Spain, andtook the pleasant form of capturing Spanish treasure-ships. Afterauthority, expelled from the altar, finds a new and securer home upon thethrone. The maintenance of Christian morality is to be transferred fromthe discredited ecclesiastical authorities to the hands of the State. Sceptical as tothe existence of unicorns and salamanders, the age of Machiavelli and HenryVIII found food for its credulity in the worship of that rare monster, the GodfearingPrince.’ Some such credulity is characteristic of revolutionary epochs.88 revolutionary powerthat time, the only danger to the Anglican Church was from theLeft, not from the Right. But the attack from the Left wasdefeated, and was succeeded byGood King Charles’s golden days,When loyalty no harm meant.The Vicar of Bray illustrates the defeat of the Church by the State inProtestant countries. So long as religious toleration was notthought possible, Erastianism was the only available substitutefor the authority of the Pope and General Councils.Erastianism, however, could never be satisfactory to men inwhom personal religion was strong. There was something grotesquein asking men to submit to the authority of Parliament onsuch questions as the existence of Purgatory. The Independentsrejected the State and the Church equally as theological authorities,and claimed the right of private judgement, with the corollaryof religious toleration. This point of view readily associateditself with revolt against secular despotism. If each individualhad a right to his own theological opinions, had he not, perhaps,other rights as well? Were there not assignable limits to whatgovernments might legitimately do to private citizens? Hencethe doctrine of the Rights of Man, carried across the Atlantic bythe defeated followers of Cromwell, embodied by Jefferson inthe American Constitution, and brought back to Europe by theFrench Revolution.III. The French Revolution and Nationalism. The Western world, fromthe Reformation until 1848, was undergoing a continuousupheaval which may be called the Rights-of-Man Revolution. In1848, this movement began to transform itself into nationalismeast of the Rhine. In France, the association had existed since1792, and in England from the beginning; in America, it hadexisted since 1776. The nationalist aspect of the movement hasrevolutionary power 89gradually overpowered the Rights-of-Man aspect, but this latterwas at first the more important.It is customary in our day to pour scorn on the Rights ofMan, as a piece of shallow eighteenth-century rhetoric. It is truethat, philosophically considered, the doctrine is indefensible;but historically and pragmatically it was useful, and we enjoymany freedoms which it helped to win. A Benthamite, to whomthe abstract conception of ‘rights’ is inadmissible, can state whatis, for practical purposes, the same doctrine in the followingterms: ‘The general happiness is increased if a certain sphere isdefined within which each individual is to be free to act as hechooses, without the interference of any external authority.’ Theadministration of justice was also a matter that interested theadvocates of the Rights of Man; they held that no man should bedeprived of life or liberty without due process of law. This is anopinion which, whether true or false, involves no philosophicalabsurdity.It is obvious that the doctrine is, in origin and sentiment,anti-governmental. The subject of a despotic government holdsthat he should be free to choose his religion as he pleases, toexercise his business in all lawful ways without bureaucraticinterference, to marry where he loves, and to rebel against analien domination. Where governmental decisions are necessary,they should—so the advocate of the Rights of Man contends—bethe decisions of a majority or of their representatives, not of anarbitrary and merely traditional authority such as that of kingsand priests. These views gradually prevailed throughout the civilisedworld, and produced the peculiar mentality of Liberalism,which retains even when in power a certain suspicion ofgovernmental action.Individualism has obvious logical and historical relations toProtestantism, which asserted its doctrines in the theologicalsphere, although it often abandoned them when it acquiredpower. Through Protestantism, there is a connection with early90 revolutionary powerChristianity, and with its hostility to the pagan State. There isalso a deeper connection with Christianity, owing to its concernwith the individual soul. According to Christian ethics, no Statenecessity can justify the authorities in compelling a man to performa sinful action. The Church holds that a marriage is null ifeither party is subject to compulsion. Even in persecution thetheory is still individualistic: the purpose is to lead the individualheretic to recantation and repentance, rather than to effect abenefit to the community. Kant’s principle, that each man isan end in himself, is derived from Christian teaching. In theCatholic Church, a long career of power had somewhat obscuredthe individualism of early Christianity; but Protestantism, especiallyin its more extreme forms, revived it, and applied it to thetheory of government.When a revolutionary and a traditional creed fight for mastery,as happened in the French Revolution, the power of thevictors over the vanquished is naked power. The revolutionaryand Napoleonic armies exhibited a combination of the propagandistforce of a new creed with naked power on a largerscale than had been seen before in Europe, and the effect uponthe imagination of the Continent has lasted to the present day.Traditional power everywhere was challenged by the Jacobins,but it was Napoleon’s armies that made the challenge effective.Napoleon’s enemies fought in defence of ancient abuses, andestablished a reactionary system when they were at last victorious.Under their dull repression his violence and extortionwere forgotten; the deadness of the Great Peace made war seemsplendid and bayonets the harbingers of freedom. A Byroniccult of violence grew up during the years of the Holy Alliance,and gradually moulded men’s daily thoughts. All this is traceableto the naked power of Napoleon, and its connection withthe emancipating war-cries of the Revolution. Hitler andMussolini, no less than Stalin, owe their success to Robespierreand Napoleon.revolutionary power 91Revolutionary power, as the case of Napoleon shows, is veryapt to degenerate into naked power. The clash of rival fanaticism,whether in foreign conquest, in religious persecution, orin the class war, is distinguished, it is true, from naked powerby the fact that it is a group, not an individual, that seeks power,and that it seeks it, not for its own sake, but for the sake of itscreed. But since power is its means, and in a long conflict theend is apt to be forgotten, there is a tendency, especially if thestruggle is long and severe, for fanaticism to become graduallytransformed into the mere pursuit of victory. The differencebetween revolutionary and naked power is therefore often lessthan it seems to be at first sight. In Latin America, the revoltagainst Spain was led, at first, by Liberals and democrats, butended, in most cases, in the establishment of a series of unstablemilitary dictatorships separated by mutinies. Only where therevolutionary faith is strong and widespread, and victory is nottoo long delayed, can the habit of co-operation survive theshock involved in revolution, and enable the new governmentto rest upon consent rather than upon mere military force.A government without psychological authority must be atyranny.IV. The Russian Revolution. Of the importance of the Russian Revolutionin the history of the world, it is as yet too soon to judge;we can only speak, as yet, of some of its aspects. Like earlyChristianity, it preaches doctrines which are internationaland even anti-national; like Islam, but unlike Christianity, itis essentially political. The only part of its creed, however,which, so far, has proved effective, is the challenge to Liberalism.Until November 1917, Liberalism had only been combated byreactionaries; Marxists, like other progressives, advocated democracy,free speech, free press, and the rest of the Liberal politicalapparatus. The Soviet Government, when it seized power,reverted to the teaching of the Catholic Church in its great days:92 revolutionary powerthat it is the business of Authority to propagate Truth, both bypositive teaching and by the suppression of all rival doctrines.This involved, of course, the establishment of an undemocraticdictatorship, depending for its stability upon the Red Army.What was new was the amalgamation of political and economicpower, which made possible an enormous increase of governmentalcontrol.The international part of Communist doctrine has provedineffective, but the rejection of Liberalism has had an extraordinarysuccess. From the Rhine to the Pacific Ocean, all itschief doctrines are rejected almost everywhere; Italy first, andthen Germany, adopted the political technique of the Bolsheviks;even in the countries that remain democratic, the Liberal faithhas lost its fervour. Liberals hold, for example, that when publicbuildings are destroyed by incendiaries, an attempt should bemade by the police and the law-courts to discover the actualculprits; but the modern-minded man holds, like Nero, that theguilt should be attributed, by means of manufactured evidence,to whatever party he personally dislikes. As regards such mattersas free speech, he holds, like St Ambrose, that there should befreedom for his own party, but not for any other.The result of such doctrines is to transform all power, first,into revolutionary power, and then, by inevitable gradations,into naked power. This danger is imminent; but as to the meansof averting it I shall say no more until a later stage.The decay of Liberalism has many causes, both technical andpsychological. They are to be found in the technique of war, inthe technique of production, in the increased facilities forpropaganda, and in nationalism, which is itself an outcome ofLiberal doctrines. All these causes, especially where the State haseconomic as well as political power, have immensely increasedthe power of governments. The problems of our time, as regardsthe relation of the individual to the State, are new problems,which Locke and Montesquieu will not enable us to solve. Arevolutionary power 93modern community, just as much as those of the eighteenthcentury, requires, if it is to remain happy and prosperous, asphere for individual initiative, but this sphere must be definedafresh, and safeguarded by new methods.94 revolutionary power8ECONOMIC POWEREconomic power, unlike military power, is not primary, butderivative. Within one State, it depends on law; in internationaldealings it is only on minor issues that it depends on law, butwhen large issues are involved it depends upon war or the threatof war. It has been customary to accept economic power withoutanalysis, and this has led, in modern times, to an undueemphasis upon economics, as opposed to war and propaganda,in the causal interpretation of history.Apart from the economic power of labour, all other economicpower, in its ultimate analysis, consists in being able to decide,by the use of armed force if necessary, who shall be allowed tostand upon a given piece of land and to put things into it and takethings from it. In some cases this is obvious. The oil of SouthernPersia belongs to the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, because theBritish Government has decreed that no one else shall haveaccess to it, and has hitherto been strong enough to enforce itswill; but if Great Britain were defeated in a serious war, theownership would probably change. Rhodesian goldfields belongto certain rich men because the British democracy thought itworth while to make these men rich by going to war withLobengula. The oil of the United States belongs to certain companiesbecause they have a legal title to it, and the armed forcesof the United States are prepared to enforce the law; the Indians,to whom the oil regions originally belonged, have no legal title,because they were defeated in war. The iron ore of Lorrainebelongs to the citizens of France or Germany according to whichhas been victor in the most recent war between those two countries.And so on.But the same analysis applies in less obvious cases. Why musta tenant farmer pay rent for his farm, and why can he sell hiscrop? He must pay rent because the land ‘belongs’ to the landowner.The landowner owns the land because he has acquired itby purchase or inheritance from someone else. Pursuing thehistory of his title backwards, we come ultimately to some manwho acquired the land by force—either the arbitrary power ofa king exercised in favour of some courtier, or a large-scale conquestsuch as those of the Saxons and Normans. In the intervalsbetween such acts of violence, the power of the State is used toensure that ownership shall pass according to law. And ownershipof land is power to decide who shall be permitted to be onthe land. For this permission the farmer pays rent, and in virtueof it he can sell his crop.The power of the industrialist is of the same sort; it rests,in the last analysis, upon the lock-out, that is to say, upon thefact that the owner of a factory can call upon the forces ofthe State to prevent unauthorised persons from entering it. Incertain states of public opinion, the State may be reluctant todo the bidding of the owner in this respect; the consequenceis that stay-in strikes become possible. As soon as they are toleratedby the State, ownership ceases to be vested wholly in theemployer, and begins to be shared, in some degree, with theemployees.96 economic powerCredit is more abstract than other kinds of economic power,but is not essentially different; it depends upon the legal right totransfer a surplus of consumable commodities from those whohave produced them to others who are engaged in work whichis not immediately productive. In the case of a private personor corporation which borrows money, the obligations can beenforced by law, but in the case of a government the ultimatesanction is the military power of other governments. This sanctionmay fail, as in Russia after the Revolution; when it fails, theborrower simply acquires the property of the lender. Forexample, it is the Soviet Government, not the pre-war shareholders,that has power to decide who shall have access to theLena goldfields.Thus the economic power of private persons depends uponthe decision of their government to employ its armed forces,if necessary, in accordance with a set of rules as to who shallbe allowed access to land; while the economic power ofgovernments depends in part upon their armed forces, and inpart upon the respect of other governments for treaties andinternational law.The connection of economic power with government is tosome extent reciprocal; that is to say, a group of men may, bycombination, acquire military power, and, having acquiredit, may possess economic power. The ultimate acquisition ofeconomic power may, in fact, be their original motive in combining.Consider, for example, the semi-anarchic conditionsprevailing in a gold-rush such as that in California in 1849, or inVictoria a few years later. A man who possessed gold which hehad acquired legally on his own holding could not be said topossess economic power until he had lodged his gold in a bank.Until then, he was liable to be robbed and murdered. In a state ofcomplete anarchy, involving a war of all against all, gold would beuseless except to a man so quick and sure with his revolver as tobe able to defend himself against every assailant; and even toeconomic power 97him, it could only be a pleasant object to contemplate, since hecould satisfy his needs by the threat of murder, without havingto make any payment. Such a state of affairs would necessarily beunstable, except possibly in a very sparse food-gathering population.Agriculture is impossible unless there are means of preventingtrespass and the theft of crops. It is obvious that an anarchiccommunity composed of more or less civilised individuals, likethe men in a gold rush, will soon evolve a government of somekind, such as a committee of Vigilantes. Energetic men willcombine to prevent others from plundering them; if there is nooutside authority to interfere, they may also plunder others, butthey will do so with moderation, for fear of killing the goosethat lays the golden eggs. They may, for example, sell protectionin return for a percentage of a man’s earnings. This is calledincome tax. As soon as there are rules determining the giving ofprotection, the reign of military force is disguised as the reignof law, and anarchy has ceased to exist. But the ultimate basis oflaw and of economic relations is still the military power of theVigilantes.The historical development has, of course, been differentfrom this, because it has been gradual, and not dependent, as arule, upon men accustomed to more civilised institutions thanthose under which they were living at the moment. None theless, something very much of the above sort occurs wheneverthere is foreign conquest, particularly if the conquerors are asmall minority; and ownership of land can usually be tracedback to some such conquest. In international economic relations,we have not yet reached the stage represented by thefirst formation of the committee of Vigilantes: the strongernations, individually, each still extract money from the weakerby the threat of death. This is illustrated by recent British dealingswith Mexico in the matter of oil, or rather would be butfor the Monroe Doctrine. A more forcible illustration was theReparation Clauses of the Versailles Treaty. But in the internal98 economic powereconomic systems of civilised countries the legal foundationsare complex. The wealth of the Church depends upon tradition;wage-earners have profited to some extent by tradeunionism and by political action; wives and children haverights which are based upon the moral sentiments of thecommunity. But whatever the economic rules made by theState may be, military power in the background is essential totheir enforcement.In the case of private persons, the rules made by the Stateconstitute the relevant part of the Law. This part of the Law, likeevery other, is only effective when it is supported by publicopinion. Public opinion, in accordance with the eighth commandment,reprobates theft, and defines ‘theft’ as taking propertyin a manner condemned by the law. Thus the economicpower of private persons rests ultimately on opinion, namely onthe moral condemnation of theft, together with the sentimentwhich allows theft to be defined by the law. Where this sentimentis weak or non-existent, property is endangered; Stalin, forinstance, began his career as a virtuous bandit practising hisvocation in the interests of Communism. We have seen how thepower of the Pope to release men from the moral obligation ofthe eighth commandment enabled him to control the Italianbankers in the thirteenth century.Economic power within a State, although ultimately derivedfrom law and public opinion, easily acquires a certain independence.It can influence law by corruption and public opinion bypropaganda. It can put politicians under obligations which interferewith their freedom. It can threaten to cause a financial crisis.But there are very definite limits to what it can achieve. Caesarwas helped to power by his creditors, who saw no hope ofrepayment except through his success; but when he had succeededhe was powerful enough to defy them. Charles V borrowedfrom the Fuggers the money required to buy the positionof Emperor, but when he had become Emperor he snapped hiseconomic power 99fingers at them and they lost what they had lent.1 The City ofLondon, in our own day, has had a similar experience in helpingGerman recovery; and so has Thyssen in helping to put Hitlerinto power.Let us consider, for a moment, the power of the plutocracy ina democratic country. It has been unable to introduce Asiaticlabour in California or Australia, except in early days in smallnumbers. It has been unable to destroy trade unionism. It hasbeen unable, especially in Great Britain, to avoid heavy taxationof the rich. And it has been unable to prevent socialist propaganda.Per contra, it can prevent governments composed of Socialistsfrom introducing Socialism, and if they are obstinate it canbring about their downfall by engineering a crisis and by propadanda.If these means were to fail, it could stir up a civil war toprevent the establishment of Socialism. That is to say, where theissue is simple and public opinion is definite, the plutocracy ispowerless; but where public opinion is undecided, or baffled bythe complexity of the issue, the plutocracy can secure a desiredpolitical result.The power of trade unions is the converse of the power of therich. Trade unions can keep out coloured labour, prevent theirown extinction, secure heavy death duties and income tax, andpreserve freedom for their own propaganda. But they have failed1 The Fuggers never could resist a Hapsburg borrower. They lent money, notonly to Charles V, but to the Emperor Maximilian before him, and to hisSpanish descendants after him. The Introduction to the Fugger News Letters says:‘At least four million ducats had been borrowed from the Fuggers by theSpanish kings and never repaid, and it is not exaggeration if the losses accruingfrom their business transactions with the Hapsburgs in the west and east areestimated at eight million florins. . . . But for them (the Fuggers) the Reformationin Germany would probably have triumphed without opposition. Themost capable members of this House strove for a century, but nothingremained to their innumerable heirs but an inordinately costly pile of parchmentsand heavily mortgaged landed property.’100 economic powerhitherto to bring about Socialism, or to keep in power governmentswhich they liked but which a majority of the nationdistrusted.Thus the power of economic organisations to influence politicaldecisions in a democracy is limited by public opinion,which, on many important issues, refuses to be swayed even byvery intensive propaganda. Democracy, where it exists, has morereality than many opponents of capitalism are willing to admit.Although economic power, in so far as it is regulated by law,ultimately depends upon ownership of land, it is not the nominallandowners who have the greatest share of it in a moderncommunity. In feudal times, the men who owned the land hadthe power; they could deal with wages by such measures as theStatute of Labourers, and with the nascent power of credit bypogroms. But where industrialism has developed, credit hasbecome stronger than nominal ownership of land. Landownersborrow, wisely or unwisely, and in doing so become dependentupon the banks. This is a commonplace, and usually regarded asentirely a consequence of changes in the technique of production.In fact, however, as may be seen from its having happenedin India, where agricultural technique is not modern, it is quiteas much a result of the power and determination of the State toenforce the law. Where Law is not all-powerful, money-lendersare, at intervals, murdered by their debtors, who at the sametime burn all documents giving evidence of indebtedness.Everybody connected with the land, from prince to peasant, hasbeen addicted to borrowing ever since there first were willinglenders; but it is only where Law is respected and enforced thatthe borrower has to go on paying interest until he is ruined.Where that happens, the economic power derived from landedproperty passes from the borrower to the lender. And in amodern community the lender is usually a bank.In a modern large corporation, ownership and power are byno means necessarily combined. This matter, as it affects theeconomic power 101United States, is authoritatively dealt with in a very importantbook, The Modern Corporation and Private Property, by Berle and Means(1932). They contend that, although ownership is centrifugal,economic power is centripetal; by a very careful and exhaustiveinvestigation they arrive at the conclusion that two thousandindividuals control half the industry of the United States (p. 33).They regard the modern executive as analogous to the kings andPopes of former times; in their opinion, more is to be learnt as tohis motives by studying such men as Alexander the Great than byconsidering him as the successor of the tradesmen who appearin the pages of Adam Smith. The concentration of power in thesevast economic organisations is analogous—so they argue—tothat in the mediaeval Church or in the National State, and is suchas to enable corporations to compete with States on equal terms.It is easy to see how this concentration has come about. Theordinary shareholder in a railway company, for example, has novoice in the management of the railway; he may, in theory, haveabout as much as the average voter at a Parliamentary electionhas in the management of the country, but in practice he haseven less than this. The economic power of the railway is in thehands of a very few men; in America, it has usually been in thehands of one man. In every developed country, the bulk of economicpower belongs to a small body of individuals. Sometimesthese men are private capitalists, as in America, France, and GreatBritain; sometimes they are politicians, as in Germany, Italy andRussia. The latter system arises where economic and politicalpower have coalesced. The tendency for economic power tobecome concentrated in few hands is a commonplace, but thistendency applies to power in general, not only to economicpower. A system in which economic and political power havecoalesced is at a later stage of development than one in whichthey are separate, just as a Steel Trust belongs to a later stage thana number of competing small steel manufacturers. But I do notwish, as yet, to discuss the totalitarian State.102 economic powerThe possession of economic power may lead to the possessionof military or propaganda power, but the opposite process is justas apt to occur. Under primitive conditions, military power isusually the source of other kinds, in so far as the relationsbetween different countries are concerned. Alexander was not asrich as the Persians, and the Romans were not as rich as theCarthaginians; but by victory in war the conquerors, in each case,made themselves richer than their enemies. The Mohammedans,at the beginning of their career of conquest, were very muchpoorer than the Byzantines, and the Teutonic invaders werepoorer than the Western Empire. In all these cases, militarypower was the source of economic power. But within the Arabnation, the military and economic power of the Prophet and hisfamily was derived from propaganda; so was the power andwealth of the Church in the West.There are a number of instances of States which have acquiredmilitary power because of their economic strength. In antiquity,the Greek maritime cities and Carthage are the most notableexamples; in the Middle Ages, the Italian republics; and in moderntimes, first Holland and then England. In all these instances,with the partial exception of England after the industrial revolution,economic power was based upon commerce, not upon theownership of raw materials. Certain cities or States acquired apartial monopoly of commerce through a combination of skillwith geographical advantages. (The latter alone were not sufficient,as may be seen in the decline of Spain during the seventeenthcentury.) The wealth obtained by commerce was spent,in part, on the hire of mercenaries, and was thus made into ameans of obtaining military power. This method had, however,the drawback that it involved a constant danger of mutiny orlarge-scale treachery; for this reason, Machiavelli disapproves ofit, and advises armies composed of citizens. The advice would besound in the case of a large country enriched by commerce, butin the case of a Greek City State or a small Italian Republic it waseconomic power 103useless. Economic power based on commerce can only be stablewhen it belongs to a large community, or to one which is muchmore civilised than its neighbours.Commerce, however, has lost its importance. Owing toimprovement in the means of communication, geographicalsituation is less important than it used to be; and owing toimperialism, the important States have less need of external tradethan they formerly had. The important form of economic power,in international relations, is now the possession of raw materialsand food; and the most important raw materials are thoserequired in war. Thus military and economic power havebecome scarcely distinguishable. Take oil, for example: a countrycannot fight without oil, and cannot own oil fields unless it isable to fight. Either condition may fail: the oil of Persia wasuseless to the Persians because they had no adequate armies, andthe armed forces of Germany will be useless to the Germansunless they can obtain oil. A similar state of affairs exists inregard to food: a powerful war-machine requires an immensediversion of national energies from food production, andtherefore depends upon military control of large fertile areas.Economic and military power have never, in the past, been soclosely interconnected as they are at present. No nation can bepowerful without developed industrialism and access to rawmaterials and food. Per contra, it is by means of military power thatnations acquire access to such raw materials as are not obtainableon their own territory. The Germans, during the War, acquiredby conquest the oil of Rumania and the harvest of the Ukraine;and States which derive raw materials from the tropics hold theircolonies by their military strength or by that of their allies.The part played by propaganda in national power hasincreased with the spread of education. A nation cannot succeedin modern war unless most people are willing to suffer hardshipand many people are willing to die. In order to produce thiswillingness, the rulers have to persuade their subjects that the104 economic powerwar is about something important—so important, in fact, asto be worthy of martyrdom. Propaganda was a large part ofthe cause of the Allied victory in the War, and almost the solecause of the Soviet victory in the years 1918 to 1920. It is obviousthat the same causes which are leading to a coalescence ofmilitary and economic power are also tending towards a unificationof both with propaganda power. There is, in fact, a generaltendency towards the combination of all forms of power in asingle organisation, which must necessarily be the State. Unlesscounter-acting forces come into play, the distinction betweendifferent kinds of power will soon be of only historical interest.At this point, we must consider a view which Marxism hasmade familiar, namely that capitalism tends to generate a war ofclasses which will ultimately dominate all other forms of conflict.It is not by any means easy to interpret Marx, but he seemsto have thought that, in times of peace, all economic powerbelongs to landowners and capitalists, who will exploit theircontrol to the uttermost, thereby stirring the proletariat to revolt.The proletariat, being the vast majority, will win in war as soonas they are united, and will institute a system in which theeconomic power derived from land and capital will be transferredto the community as a whole. Whether or not this theoryis exactly that of Marx, it is, broadly, that of present-daycommunists, and therefore deserves to be examined.The view that all economic power belongs to landowners andcapitalists is one which, though roughly true, and though I havehitherto assumed it, has important limitations. Landowners andcapitalists are helpless without labour, and strikes, when they aresufficiently determined and widespread, can secure for labour ashare of economic power. But the possibilities of the strike aresuch a familiar theme that I shall say no more about them.The second question that arises is: Will capitalists, in fact,exploit their control to the uttermost? Where they are prudent,they do not do so, for fear of just such consequences as Marxeconomic power 105foresaw. If they allow the workers some share in prosperity theymay prevent them from becoming revolutionary; of this themost notable example is in the United States, where the skilledworkers are on the whole Conservative.The assumption that the proletariat are the majority is veryquestionable. It is definitely untrue in agricultural countrieswhere peasant proprietorship prevails. And in countries wherethere is much settled wealth, many men who, from an economicpoint of view, are proletarians, are politically on the side of therich, because their employment depends upon the demandfor luxuries. A class-war, if it occurs, is therefore by no meanscertain to be won by the proletariat.Finally, most people, at a crisis, feel more loyalty to theirnation than to their class. This may not always be the case, butthere is as yet no sign of any change since 1914, when almost allnominal internationalists became patriotic and bellicose. Theclass-war, therefore, though it remains a possibility of the distantfuture, is hardly to be expected while the danger of nationalistwars remains as great as it is at present.It may be said that the present civil war in Spain, and itsrepercussion in other countries, proves that the class-war is nowdominant over nationalist considerations. I do not think, however,that the course of events bears out this view. Germany andItaly have nationalistic grounds for siding with Franco; Englandand France have nationalistic grounds for opposing him. Itis true that British opposition to Franco has been much less,hitherto, than it would have been if British interest alone haddetermined the action of Government, because Conservativesnaturally sympathise with him. Nevertheless, as soon as suchmatters as Moroccan ore or naval control of the Mediterraneanare in question, British interests override political sympathies.The grouping of the Great Powers is again what it was before1914, in spite of the Russian Revolution. Liberals disliked theTsar, and Conservatives dislike Stalin; but neither Sir E. Grey nor106 economic powerthe present Government could permit such matter of taste tointerfere with the pursuit of British interests.To sum up what has been said in this chapter: the economicpower of a military unit (which may be composed of severalindependent States) depends upon (a) its capacity to defend itsown territory, (b) its ability to threaten the territory of others,(c) its possession of raw materials, food, and industrial skill,(d) its power of supplying goods and services needed by othermilitary units. In all this, military and economic factors areinextricably mingled; for example, Japan, by purely militarymeans, has acquired in China raw materials which are essentialto great military strength, and in like manner England and Francehave acquired oil in the Near East, but both would have beenimpossible without a considerable degree of previous industrialdevelopment. The importance of economic factors in war steadilyincreases as war becomes more mechanised and scientific,but it is not safe to assume that the side with superior economicresources must necessarily be victorious. The importance ofpropaganda in generating national feeling has increased as muchas that of economic factors.In the internal economic relations of a single State, the law setslimits to what can be done in the way of extracting wealth fromothers. An individual or a group must possess a complete orpartial monopoly of something desired by others. Monopoliescan be created by law; for example, patents, copyrights, andownership of land. They can also be created by combination, asin the cases of trusts and trade unions. Apart from what privateindividuals or groups can extract by bargaining, the State retainsthe right to take by force whatever it considers necessary. Andinfluential private groups can induce the State to use this right,as well as the power of making war, in a manner which is advantageousto themselves though not necessarily to the nation aswhole; they can also cause the law to be such as is convenient tothemselves, e.g. by allowing combinations of employers but noteconomic power 107of wage-earners. Thus the actual degree of economic powerpossessed by an individual or group depends upon militarystrength and influence through propaganda quite as much asupon the factors usually considered in economics. Economics asa separate science is unrealistic, and misleading if taken as aguide in practice. It is one element—a very important element, itis true—in a wider study, the science of power.108 economic power9POWER OVER OPINIONIt is easy to make out a case for the view that opinion is omnipotent,and that all other forms of power are derived from it.Armies are useless unless the soldiers believe in the cause forwhich they are fighting, or, in the case of mercenaries, haveconfidence in the ability of their commander to lead them tovictory. Law is impotent unless it is generally respected. Economicinstitutions depend upon respect for the law; consider, forexample, what would happen to banking if the average citizenhad no objection to forgery. Religious opinion has often proveditself more powerful than the State. If, in any country, a largemajority were in favour of Socialism, Capitalism would becomeunworkable. On such grounds it might be said that opinion isthe ultimate power in social affairs.But this would be only a half-truth, since it ignores the forceswhich cause opinion. While it is true that opinion is an essentialelement in military force, it is equally true that military forcemay generate opinion. Almost every European country has, atthis moment, the religion which was that of its government inthe late sixteenth century, and this must be attributed mainly tothe control of persecution and propaganda by means of thearmed forces in the several countries. It is traditional to regardopinion as due to mental causes, but this is only true of theimmediate causes: in the background, there is usually force inthe service of some creed.Per contra, a creed never has force at its command to beginwith, and the first steps in the production of a wide-spreadopinion must be taken by means of persuasion alone.We have thus a kind of see-saw: first, pure persuasion leadingto the conversion of a minority; then force exerted to secure thatthe rest of the community shall be exposed to the right propaganda;and finally a genuine belief on the part of the greatmajority, which makes the use of force again unnecessary. Somebodies of opinion never get beyond the first stage, some reachthe second and then fail, others are successful in all three. TheSociety of Friends has never got beyond persuasion. The othernonconformists acquired the forces of the State in the time ofCromwell, but failed in their propaganda after they had seizedpower. The Catholic Church, after three centuries of persuasion,captured the State in the time of Constantine, and then, by force,established a system of propaganda which converted almost allthe pagans and enabled Christianity to survive the barbarianinvasion. The Marxist creed has reached the second stage, if notthe third, in Russia, but elsewhere is still in the first stage.There are, however, some important instances of influence onopinion without the aid of force at any stage. Of these the mostnotable is the rise of science. At the present day, science, incivilised countries, is encouraged by the State, but in its earlydays this was not the case. Galileo was made to recant, Newtonwas stopped by being made Master of the Mint, Lavoisier wasguillotined on the grounds that ‘la République n’pas besoin desavants’. Nevertheless these men, and a few others like them,were the creators of the modern world; their effect upon social110 power over opinionlife has been greater than that of any other men known to history,not excluding Christ and Aristotle. The only other manwhose influence was of comparable importance was Pythagoras,and his existence is doubtful.It is customary nowadays to decry Reason as a force in humanaffairs, yet the rise of science is an overwhelming argument onthe other side. The men of science proved to intelligent laymenthat a certain kind of intellectual outlook ministers to militaryprowess and to wealth; these ends were so ardently desired thatthe new intellectual outlook overcame that of the Middle Ages,in spite of the force of tradition and the revenues of the Churchand the sentiments associated with Catholic theology. The worldceased to believe that Joshua caused the sun to stand still,because Copernican astronomy was useful in navigation; itabandoned Aristotle’s physics, because Galileo’s theory of fallingbodies made it possible to calculate the trajectory of a cannonball;it rejected the story of the flood, because geology is usefulin mining; and so on. It it is now generally recognised thatscience is indispensable both in war and in peace-time industry,and that, without science, a nation can be neither rich norpowerful.All this effect on opinion has been achieved by science merelythrough appeal to fact: what science had to say in the way ofgeneral theories might be questionable, but its results in the wayof technique were patent to all. Science gave the white man themastery of the world, which he has begun to lose only since theJapanese acquired his technique.From this example, something may be learnt as to the powerof Reason in general. In the case of science, Reason prevailedover prejudice because it provided means of realising existingpurposes, and because the proof that it did so was overwhelming.Those who maintain that Reason has no power in humanaffairs overlook these two conditions. If, in the name of Reason,you summon a man to alter his fundamental purposes—topower over opinion 111pursue, say, the general happiness rather than his own power—you will fail, and you will deserve to fail, since Reason alonecannot determine the ends of life. And you will fail equally ifyou attack deep-seated prejudices while your argument is stillopen to question, or is so difficult that only men of science cansee its force. But if you can prove, by evidence which is convincingto every sane man who takes the trouble to examine it,that you possess a means of facilitating the satisfaction of existingdesires, you may hope, with a certain degree of confidence,that men will ultimately believe what you say. This, of course,involves the proviso that the existing desires which you cansatisfy are those of men who have power or are capable ofacquiring it.So much for the power of Reason in human affairs. I comenow to another form of un-forceful persuasion, namely that ofthe founders of religions. Here the process, reduced to its bareformula, is this: if a certain proposition is true, I shall be able torealise my desires; therefore I wish this proposition to be true;therefore, unless I have exceptional intellectual self-control, Ibelieve it to be true. Orthodoxy and a virtuous life, I am told,will enable me to go to heaven when I die; there is pleasure inbelieving this, and therefore I shall probably believe it if it isforcibly presented to me. The cause of belief, here, is not, as inscience, the evidence of fact, but the pleasant feelings derivedfrom belief, together with sufficient vigour of assertion in theenvironment to make the belief seem not incredible.The power of advertisement comes under the same head. It ispleasant to believe in so-and-so’s pills, since it gives you hope ofbetter health; it is possible to believe in them, if you find theirexcellence very frequently and emphatically asserted. Nonrationalpropaganda like the rational sort, must appeal to existingdesires, but it substitutes iteration for the appeal to fact.The opposition between a rational and an irrational appeal is,in practice, less clear-cut than in the above analysis. Usually there112 power over opinionis some rational evidence, though not enough to be conclusive;the irrationality consists in attaching too much weight to it.Belief, when it is not simply traditional, is a product of severalfactors: desire, evidence, and iteration. When either the desire orthe evidence is nil, there will be no belief; when there is nooutside assertion, belief will only arise in exceptional characters,such as founders of religions, scientific discoverers, and lunatics.To produce a mass belief, of the sort that is socially important, allthree elements must exist in some degree; but if one element isincreased while another is diminished, the resulting amount ofbelief may be unchanged. More propaganda is necessary to causeacceptance of a belief for which there is little evidence than ofone for which the evidence is strong, if both are equally satisfactoryto desire; and so on.It is through the potency of iteration that the holders ofpower acquire their capacity of influencing belief. Officialpropaganda has old and new forms. The Church has a techniquewhich is in many ways admirable, but was developedbefore the days of printing, and is therefore less effective than itused to be. The State had employed certain methods for manycenturies: the King’s head on coins; coronations and jubilees;the spectacular aspects of the army and navy, and so on. Butthese are far less potent than the more modern methods: education,the press, the cinema, the radio, etc. These are employedto the utmost in totalitarian States, but it is too soon to judge oftheir success.I said that propaganda must appeal to desire, and this may beconfirmed by the failure of State propaganda when opposed tonational feeling, as in large parts of Austria-Hungary before theWar, in Ireland until 1922, and in India down to the presenttime. Propaganda is only successful when it is in harmony withsomething in the patient: his desire for an immortal soul, forhealth, for the greatness of his nation, or what not. Where thereis no such fundamental reason for acquiescence, the assertionspower over opinion 113of authority are viewed with cynical scepticism. One of theadvantages of democracy, from the governmental point ofview, is that it makes the average citizen easier to deceive, sincehe regards the government as his government. Opposition to awar which is not swiftly successful arises much less readily ina democracy than under any other form of constitution. In ademocracy, a majority can only turn against the government byfirst admitting to themselves that they were mistaken in formerlythinking well of their chosen leaders, which is difficult andunpleasant.Systematic propaganda, on a large scale, is at present, indemocratic countries, divided between the Churches, businessadvertisers, political parties, the plutocracy, and the State. In themain, all these forces work on the same side, with the exceptionof political parties in opposition, and even they, if theyhave any hope of office, are unlikely to oppose the fundamentalsof State propaganda. In the totalitarian countries, theState is virtually the sole propagandist. But, in spite of all thepower of modern propaganda, I do not believe that the officialview would be widely accepted in the event of defeat in war.This situation suddenly gives to a government the kind ofimpotence that belongs to alien governments opposed bynationalist feeling; and the more the expectation of victory hasbeen used to stimulate warlike ardour, the greater will be thereaction when it is found that victory is unobtainable. It istherefore to be expected that the next war, like the last, will endwith a crop of revolutions, which will be more fierce thanthose of 1917 and 1918 because the war will have been moredestructive. It is to be hoped that rulers realise the risk they willrun of being put to death by the mob, which is at least as greatas the risk that soldiers will run of death at the hands of theenemy.It is easy to overestimate the power of official propaganda,especially when there is no competition. In so far as it devotes114 power over opinionitself to causing belief in false propositions of which time willprove the falsity, it is in as bad a position as the Aristotelians intheir opposition to Galileo. Given two opposing groups of States,each of which endeavours to instil the certainty of victory inwar, one side, if not both, must experience a dramatic refutationof official statements. When all opposing propaganda is forbidden,rulers are likely to think that they can cause anything to bebelieved, and so to become over-weening and careless. Lies needcompetition if they are to retain their vigour.Power over opinion, like all other forms of power, tends tocoalescence and concentration, leading logically to a State monopoly.But even apart from war it would be rash to assume thata State monopoly of propaganda must make a governmentinvulnerable. In the long run, those who possess the power arelikely to become too flagrantly indifferent to the interests of thecommon man, as the Popes were in the time of Luther. Sooner orlater, some new Luther will challenge the authority of the State,and, like his predecessor, be so quickly successful that it will beimpossible to suppress him. This will happen because the rulerswill believe that it cannot happen. But whether the change willbe for the better it is impossible to foresee.The effect of organisation and unification, in the matter ofpropaganda as in other matters, is to delay revolution, but tomake it more violent when it comes. When only one doctrine isofficially allowed, men get no practice in thinking or in weighingalternatives; only a great wave of passionate revolt candethrone orthodoxy; and in order to make the opposition sufficientlywhole-hearted and violent to achieve success, it willseem necessary to deny even what was true in governmentaldogma. The only thing that will not be denied will be theimportance of immediately establishing some orthodoxy, sincethis will be considered necessary for victory. From a rationaliststandpoint, therefore, the likelihood of revolution in a totalitarianState is not necessarily a ground for rejoicing. What is morepower over opinion 115to be desired is a gradual increase in the sense of security, leadingto a lessening of zeal, and giving an opening for laziness—the greatest of all virtues in the ruler of a totalitarian State, withthe sole exception of non-existence.116 power over opinion10CREEDS AS SOURCESOF POWERThe power of a community depends not only upon its numbersand its economic resources and its technical capacity, but alsoupon its beliefs. A fanatical creed, held by all the members of acommunity, often greatly increases its power; sometimes, however,it diminishes it. As fanatical creeds are much more in thefashion than they were during the nineteenth century, the questionof their effect on power is one of great practical importance.One of the arguments against democracy is that a nation ofunited fanatics has more chance of success in war than a nationcontaining a large proportion of sane men. Let us examine thisargument in the light of history.It should be observed, to begin with, that the cases in whichfanaticism has led to success are naturally better known thanthose in which it has led to failure, since the cases of failure haveremained comparatively obscure. Thus a too rapid survey is aptto be misleading; but if we are aware of this possible source oferror, it is not difficult to avoid.The classic example of power through fanaticism is the rise ofIslam. Mohammed added nothing to the knowledge or to thematerial resources of the Arabs, and yet, within a few years of hisdeath, they had acquired a large empire by defeating their mostpowerful neighbours. Undoubtedly, the religion founded by theProphet was an essential element in the success of his nation. Atthe very end of his life, he declared war on the Byzantine Empire.‘The Moslems were discouraged: they alleged the want ofmoney, or horses, or provisions: the season of harvest, and theintolerable heat of the summer: “Hell is much hotter,” said theindignant prophet. He disdained to compel their service; but onhis return he admonished the most guilty, by an excommunicationof fifty days’.1 Fanaticism, while Mohammed lived, and fora few years after his death, united the Arab nation, gave itconfidence in battle, and promoted courage by the promise ofParadise to those who fell fighting the infidel.But although fanaticism inspired the first attempts of theArabs, it was to other causes that they owed their prolongedcareer of victory. The Byzantine and Persian Empires were bothweakened by long and indecisive wars; and Roman armies, at alltimes, were weak and against cavalry. The Arab horsemen wereincredibly mobile, and were inured to hardships which theirmore luxurious neighbours found intolerable. These circumstanceswere essential to the first successes of the Muslim.Very soon—sooner than in the beginning of any other greatreligion—fanaticism was dethroned from the government. Ali, theProphet’s son-in-law, kept alive the original enthusiasm among asection of the faithful, but he was defeated in civil war, and finallyassassinated. He was succeeded in the Caliphate by the family ofOmmiyah, who had been Mohammed’s bitterest opponents, andhad never yielded more than a political assent to his religion. ‘Thepersecutors of Mahomet usurped the inheritance of his children;1 E. Gibbon, Ch. L.118 creeds as sources of powerand the champions of idolatry became the supreme heads of hisreligion and empire. The opposition of Abu Sophian2 had beenfierce and obstinate; his conversion was tardy and reluctant; hisnew faith was fortified by necessity and interest; he served, hefought, perhaps he believed; and the sins of the time of ignorancewere expiated by the recent merits of the family of Ommiyah’.3From that moment onwards, for a long time, the Caliphatewas distinguished by free-thinking latitudinarianism, while theChristians remained fanatical. From the first, the Mohammedansshowed themselves tolerant in their dealings with conqueredChristians, and to this toleration—which was in strong contrast tothe persecuting zeal of the Catholic Church—the ease of theirconquest and the stability of their Empire were mainly due.Another case of the apparent success of fanaticism is thevictory of the Independents under Cromwell. But it may bequestioned how much fanaticism had to do with Cromwell’sachievements. In the contest with the King, Parliament wonmainly because it held London and the Eastern Counties; both itsmanpower and its economic resources far exceeded those of theKing. The Presbyterians—as always happens with the moderatesin a revolution—were gradually thrust aside because they didnot wholeheartedly desire victory. Cromwell himself, when hehad achieved power, turned out to be a practical politician,anxious to make the best of a difficult situation; but he could notignore the fanaticism of his followers, which was so unpopularas to lead, in the end, to the complete downfall of his party. Itcannot be said that, in the long run, fanaticism did anythingmore to bring success to the English Independents than to theirpredecessors, the Anabaptists of Münster.On a larger scale, the history of the French Revolution isanalogous to that of the Commonwealth in England: fanaticism,2 Father of the new Caliph Moawiyah.3 B. Gibbon, op. cit.creeds as sources of power 119victory, despotism, collapse, and reaction. Even in these twomost favourable instances, the success of the fanatics was shortlived.The cases in which fanaticism has brought nothing but disasterare much more numerous than those in which it hasbrought even temporary success. It ruined Jerusalem in the timeof Titus, and Constantinople in 1453, when the West wasrebuffed on account of the minute doctrinal differences betweenthe Eastern and Western Churches. It brought about the decay ofSpain, first through the expulsion of the Jews and Moors, andthen by causing rebellion in the Netherlands and the longexhaustion of the Wars of Religion. On the other hand, the mostsuccessful nations, throughout modern times, have been thoseleast addicted to the persecution of heretics.Nevertheless, there is now a widespread belief that doctrinaluniformity is essential to national strength. This view is held andacted upon, with the utmost rigour, in Germany and Russia, andwith slightly less severity in Italy and Japan. Many Opponentsof Fascism in France and Great Britain are inclined to concedethat freedom of thought is a source of military weakness. Let ustherefore examine this question once more, in a more abstractand analytic fashion.The question I am asking is not the broad one: should freedomof thought be encouraged, or at least tolerated? I am askinga narrower question: To what extent is a uniform creed, whetherspontaneous or imposed by authority, a source of power? And towhat extent, on the other hand, is freedom of thought a sourceof power?When a British military expedition invaded Tibet in 1905, theTibetans at first advanced boldly, because the Lamas had giventhem magic charms against bullets. When they nevertheless hadcasualties, the Lamas observed that the bullets were nickelpointed,and explained that their charms were only effectiveagainst lead. After this, the Tibetan armies showed less valour.120 creeds as sources of powerWhen Bela Kun and Kurt Eisner made Communist revolutions,they were confident that Dialectical Materialism was fighting forthem. I forget what explanation of their failure was offered bythe Lamas of the Comintern. In these two instances, uniformityof creed did not lead to victory.To arrive at the truth in this matter, it is necessary to find acompromise between two opposite truisms. The first of these is:men who agree in their beliefs can cooperate more wholeheartedlythan men who disagree. The second is: men whose beliefsare in accordance with fact are more likely to succeed thanmen whose beliefs are mistaken. Let us examine each of thesetruisms.That agreement is a help in cooperation is obvious. In the civilwar in Spain, cooperation has been difficult between anarchists,communists, and Basque nationalists, though all equally desiredthe defeat of Franco. In the same manner, though in a lesserdegree, on the other side, cooperation has been difficult betweenCarlists and modern-style Fascists. There is need of agreementas to immediate ends, and also of a certain temperamental congeniality;but where these exist, great differences of opinionmay become harmless. Sir William Napier, the historian of thePeninsular War, admired Napoleon and disliked Wellington; hisbook shows that he considered the defeat of Napoleon regrettable.But his sentiment of caste and his feeling of military dutyoverrode such purely intellectual convictions, and he fought theFrench as competently as if he had been a high Tory. In likemanner, should the occasion arise, British Tories of the presentday will fight Hitler just as vigorously as they would if they didnot admire him.The uniformity which is needed to give power to a nation, areligion, or a party, is a uniformity in practice, depending uponsentiment and habit. Where this exists, intellectual convictionscan be ignored. It exists in Great Britain at the present day, but itdid not exist until after 1745. It did not exist in France in 1792,creeds as sources of power 121or in Russia during the Great War and the subsequent civil war. Itdoes not exist in Spain at this moment. It is not difficult for agovernment to concede freedom of thought when it can relyupon loyalty in action; but when it cannot, the matter is moredifficult. It is obvious that freedom of propaganda is impossibleduring a civil war; and when there is an imminent danger ofcivil war, the argument for restricting propaganda is only slightlyless overwhelming. In dangerous situations, therefore, there is astrong case for an imposed uniformity.Let us now take up our second truism: that it is advantageousto have beliefs which are in accordance with fact. So far as directadvantages are concerned, this is only true of a limited class ofbeliefs: first, technical matters, such as the properties of highexplosives and poison gases; secondly, matters concerning therelative strengths of the opposing forces. Even as regards thesematters, it may be said, only those who decide policy and militaryoperations need have correct views: it is desirable that thepopulace should feel sure of victory, and should underrate thedangers of attack from the air. Only the government, the militarychiefs, and their technical staffs need know the facts; among allothers, blind confidence and blind obedience are what is most tobe desired.If human affairs were as calculable as chess, and, politiciansand generals as clever as good chess players, there might be sometruth in this view. The advantages of successful war are doubtful,but the disadvantages of unsuccessful war are certain. If, therefore,the supermen at the head of affairs could foresee who wasgoing to win, there would be no wars. But in fact there are wars,and in every war the government on one side, if not on both,must have miscalculated its chances. For this there are manyreasons: of pride and vanity, of ignorance, and of contagiousexcitement. When the populace is kept ignorantly confident,its confidence and its bellicose sentiment may easily be communicatedto the rulers, who can hardly attach the same weight122 creeds as sources of powerto unpleasant facts which they know but conceal as to the pleasantfacts that are being proclaimed in every newspaper and inevery conversation. Hysteria and megalomania are catching, andgovernments have no immunity.When war comes, the policy of concealment may produceeffects exactly opposite to those intended. Some, at least, of theunpleasant facts which had been kept dark are likely to becomepatent to all, and the more men have been made to live in a fool’sparadise, the more they will be horrified and discouraged by thereality. Revolution or sudden collapse is much more probable insuch circumstances than when free discussion has prepared thepublic mind for painful events.An attitude of obedience, when it is exacted from subordinates,is inimical to intelligence. In a community in which men have toaccept, at least outwardly, some obviously absurd doctrine, thebest men must become either stupid or disaffected. There will be,in consequence, a lowering of the intellectual level, which must,before long, interfere with technical progress. This is especiallytrue when the official creed is one which few intelligent mencan honestly accept. The Nazis have exiled most of the ablestGermans, and this must, sooner or later, have disastrous effectsupon their military technique. It is impossible for technique toremain long progressive without science, or for science to flourishwhere there is no freedom of thought. Consequently insistenceon doctrinal uniformity, even in matters quite remote fromwar, is ultimately fatal to military efficiency in a scientific age.We may now arrive at the practical synthesis of our two truisms.Social cohesion demands a creed, or a code of behaviour,or a prevailing sentiment, or, best, some combination of allthree; without something of the kind, a community disintegrates,and becomes subject to a tyrant or a foreign conqueror.But if this means of cohesion is to be effective, it must be verydeeply felt; it may be imposed by force upon a small minority,provided they are not specially important through exceptionalcreeds as sources of power 123intelligence or character, but it must be genuine and spontaneousin the great majority. Loyalty to a leader, national pride,and religious fervour have proved, historically, the best means ofsecuring cohesion; but loyalty to a leader is less permanentlyeffective than it used to be, owing to the decay of hereditarysovereignty, and religious fervour is threatened by the spread offree thought. Thus national pride is left, and has become relativelymore important than in former times. It has been interestingto observe the revival of this sentiment in Soviet Russia, inspite of an official creed which should be inimical to it—thoughnot more so, after all, than Christianity.How much interference with freedom is necessary for themaintenance of national pride? The interferences which actuallyoccur have mainly this end in view. In Russia, it is thoughtthat those who disagree with the official orthodoxy are likely tobehave in an unpatriotic manner; in Germany and Italy, thestrength of the government depends upon its appeal to nationalism,and any opposition is considered to be in the interestsof Moscow; in France, if liberty is lost, it will probably be toprevent pro-German treachery. In all these countries, the difficultyis that the class-conflict cuts across the conflicts ofnations, causing the capitalists in democratic countries, and theSocialists and Communists in Fascist countries, to be guided, tosome extent, by other considerations than those of the nationalinterest. If this diversion from nationalist aims can be prevented,a country’s strength is likely to be increased, but not ifit is necessary, for the purpose, to lower the whole level ofintelligence. For governments the problem is a difficult one,since nationalism is a stupid ideal, and intelligent people perceivethat it is bringing Europe to ruin. The best solution is todisguise it under some international slogan, such as democracyor communism or collective security. Where this cannot be done,as in Italy and Germany, outward uniformity demands tyranny,and does not easily produce a genuine inward sentiment.124 creeds as sources of powerTo sum up: a creed or sentiment of some kind is essential tosocial cohesion, but if it is to be a source of strength it must begenuinely and deeply felt by the great majority of the population,including a considerable percentage of those upon whomtechnical efficiency depends. Where these conditions are absent,governments may seek to produce them by censorship and persecution;but censorship and persecution, if they are severe,cause men to become out of touch with reality, and ignorant oroblivious of facts which it is important to know. Since the holdersof power are biased by their power-impulses, the amount ofinterference with freedom that conduces most to national powerwill always be less than governments are inclined to believe;therefore a diffused sentiment against interference, provided itdoes not go so far as to lead to anarchy, is likely to add to thenational strength. But it is impossible to go beyond thesegeneralities except in relation to particular cases.Throughout the above discussion, we have considered onlythe more immediate effects of a fanatical creed. The long-termeffects are quite different. A creed which is used as source ofpower inspires, for a time, great efforts, but these efforts, especiallyif they are not very successful, produce weariness, andwariness produces scepticism—not, at first, definite disbelief,which is an energetic frame of mind, but mere absence of strongbelief.4 The more the methods of propaganda have been used toproduce excitement, the greater will be the reaction, until in theend a quiet life comes to seem the only thing worth having.4 On this subject, see the very interesting chapter ‘Fog of Skepticism overRussia,’ in E. Lyons’s Assignment in Utopia. After telling of the enthusiasm withwhich the launching of the Five-Year Plan had been greeted, and of the gradualdisillusionment as the promised comforts failed to be realised, he says:‘I watched skepticism spread like a thick wet fog over Russia, soaking intothe flesh and spirits of men and women. It chilled the hearts of the leaders noless than of the masses. Men who publicly spent all their time pumping upoptimism, talked bitterly in private of the planlessness of the Plan, the terriblecreeds as sources of power 125When, after a period of repose, the population again becomescapable of excitement, it will need a new stimulus, since all theold stimuli have become boring. Hence creeds which are usedtoo intensively are transitory in their effects. In the thirteenthcentury, men’s imaginations were dominated by three greatmen: the Pope, the Emperor, and the Sultan. The Emperor andthe Sultan have disappeared, and the Pope’s power is a paleshadow of what it was. In the sixteenth and early seventeethcenturies, the wars between Catholics and Protestants filledEurope, and all large-scale propaganda was in favour of one orother of the two creeds. Yet ultimate victory went to neitherparty, but, to those who thought the issues between themunimportant. Swift satirised the conflict in his wars of Big-Endians and Little-Endians; Voltaire’s Huron, finding himself inprison with a Jansenist, thinks it equally silly of the governmentto demand his recantation and of him to refuse it. If the world,in the near future, becomes divided between Communists andFascists, the final victory will go to neither, but to those whoshrug their shoulders and say, like Candide, ‘cela est bien dit,mais il faut cultiver notre jardin’. The ultimate limit to the powerof creeds is set by boredom, weariness, and love of ease.wastage of substance and energy, the dislocation of a national economy swollenin some of its limbs and shrunken in the rest. Doubts of the efficacy ofenthusiasm were expressed in a constantly greater stress on cash rewards at onepole and harsh punishment at the other. . . . Draconic decrees were inventedalmost weekly to discipline and repress the common workers. One of themmade a single day’s absence from work punishable by loss of job, bread book,and living space: tantamount to a sentence of slow death.’ In another chapterhe writes: ‘People under dictatorships, it has been well said, are condemned toa lifetime of enthusiasm. It is a wearing sentence. Gladly would they burrowinto the heart of their misery and lick their wounds in private. But they darenot; sulking is next door to treason. Like soldiers weary unto death after a longmarch, they must line up smartly for parade.’126 creeds as sources of power11THE BIOLOGY OFORGANISATIONSWe have been considering hitherto the sentiments which arethe most important psychological sources of power: tradition,especially in the form of respect for priests and kings; fear andpersonal ambition, which are the sources of naked power; thesubstitution of a new creed for an old one, which is the source ofrevolutionary power; and the interactions between creeds andother sources of power. We come now to a new department ofour subject: the study of the organisations through which poweris exercised, considered first as organisms with a life of theirown, their in relation to their forms of government, and finallyas affecting the lives of the individuals who compose them. Inthis section of our subject, organisms are to be considered as faras possible without regard to their purposes, in the way in whichmen are considered in anatomy and biochemistry.The subject to be discussed in this chapter, namely the biologyof organisations, depends upon the fact that an organisation isalso an organism, with a life of its own, and a tendency togrowth and decay. Competition between organisations is analogousto competition between individual animals and plants, andcan be viewed, in a more or less Darwinian manner. But thisanalogy, like others, must not be pressed too far; it may serve tosuggest and to illuminate, but not to demonstrate. For example,we must not assume that decay is inevitable where social organisationsare concerned.Power is dependent upon organisation in the main, but notwholly. Purely psychological power, such as that of Plato orGalileo, may exist without any corresponding social institution.But as a rule even such power is not important unless it is propagatedby a Church, a political party, or some analogous socialorganism. For the present, I shall ignore power which is notconnected with an organisation.An organisation is a set of people who are combined in virtueof activities directed to common ends. It may be purely voluntary,like a club; it may be a natural biological group, like afamily or a clan; it may be compulsory, like a State; or it may bea complicated mixture, like a railway company. The purposeof the organisation may be explicit or unexpressed, consciousor unconscious; it may be military or political, economic orreligious, educational or athletic, and so on. Every organisation,whatever its character and whatever its purpose, involves someredistribution of power. There must be a government, whichtakes decisions in the name of the whole body, and has morepower than the single members have, at any rate as regards thepurposes for which the organisation exists. As men grow morecivilised and technique grows more complicated, the advantagesof combination become increasingly evident. But combinationalways involves some surrender of independence: we mayacquire increased power over others, but they also acquire powerover us. More and more, the important decisions are those ofbodies of men, not of single individuals. And the decisions ofbodies of men, unless the members are very few, have to be128 the biology of organisationseffected through governments. Thus government necessarilyplays a much larger part in the life of a modern civilised communitythan in that of pre-industrial societies.Even a completely democratic government—if such a thingwere possible—involves a redistribution of power. If every manhas an equal voice in joint decisions, and if there are (say) amillion members, every man has a millionth part of the powerover the whole million, instead of complete power over himselfand none over others, as he would have if he were a solitary wildanimal. This produces a very different psychology from that ofan anarchic collection of individuals. And where—as mustalways be the case to some extent—the government is not completelydemocratic, the psychological effect is increased. Themembers of the government have more power than the others,even if they are democratically elected; and so do officialsappointed by a democratically elected government. The largerthe organisation, the greater the power of the executive. Thusevery increase in the size of organisations increases inequalitiesof power by simultaneously diminishing the independence ofordinary members and enlarging the scope of the initiative ofthe government. The average man submits because much morecan be achieved cooperatively than singly; the exceptionallypower-loving man rejoices, since it provides his opportunity—unless indeed, the government is hereditary, or the powerlovingindividual belongs to a group (such as Jews in somecountries) which is not allowed to occupy positions ofimportance.Competition for power is of two sorts: between organisations,and between individuals for leadership within an organisation.Competition between organisations only arises when they haveobjects which are more or less similar, but incompatible; it maybe economic, or military, or by means of propaganda, or mayinvolve any two or all three of these methods. When NapoleonIII was engaged in making himself Emperor, he had to create anthe biology of organisations 129organisation devoted to his interests, and then to secure itssupremacy. For this purpose, he gave cigars to some people—this was economic; to others he pointed out that he was thenephew of his uncle—this was propaganda; finally he shot anumber of opponents—this was military.1 His opponents,meanwhile, had confined themselves to praising the Republicanform of government, and had neglected the cigars and bullets.The technique of acquiring dictatorship over what has been ademocracy has been familiar since Greek times, and alwaysinvolves the same mixture of bribery, propaganda and violence.This, however, is not our present theme, which is the biology oforganisations.There are two important respects in which organisationsmay differ: one is size, the other is what one might call densityof power, by which I mean the degree of control which theyexert over their members. Owing to the love of power which isto be expected in those who acquire governmental posts, everyorganisation will, in the absence of any counteracting force, tendto grow both in size and in density of power. It is possible foreither form of growth to be stopped by intrinsic causes; aninternational chess club, for example, may come to contain oilchess-players of sufficient excellence, and is not likely to wish tocontrol any of the activities of its members except those connectedwith chess. It might, under an energetic secretary, seek tomake more people ‘chess-conscious’, but this would be unlikelyto happen if the secretary were expected to be a good chessplayer;and if it did happen, the club might be ruined by thedefection of the best players. But such cases are exceptional;where the purpose of the organisation is one making a generalappeal—e.g. wealth, or political domination—growth in size isonly stopped either by the pressure of other organisations, or bythe organisation in question becoming world-wide; and growth1 See F. A. Simpson, The Rise of Louis Napoleon.130 the biology of organisationsin density is only stopped where love of personal independencebecomes overwhelmingly strong.The most obvious example of this is the State. Every Statewhich is sufficiently powerful aims at foreign conquest; apparentinstances to the contrary only arise where a State, from experience,knows itself to be less strong than it seems, or, frominexperience, believes itself to be less strong than it is. The broadrule is that a State conquers what it can, and stops only when itreaches a frontier at which some other State or States can exert apressure as strong as its own. Great Britain has not acquiredAfghanistan, because Russia is as powerful there as the Britishare; Napoleon sold Louisiana to the United States because it wasimpossible for him to defend it; and so on. So far as intrinsicforces are concerned, every State tends to become world-wide.But the power of a State is to a greater or smaller extent geographical:it usually radiates from a centre, and grows less as thedistance from the centre increases. Consequently, at a greater orsmaller distance from the centre, its power is in equilibriumwith that of some other State, and there the frontiers will be,unless the force of tradition interferes.What has just been said is too abstract to be true withoutmodification. Small States exist, not by their own power, butthrough the jealousies of large ones; e.g. Belgium exists becauseits existence is convenient for England and France. Portugal haslarge colonies, because the Great Powers cannot agree about howto divide them. Since war is a serious business, a State may, for aconsiderable time, retain territory which it would lose if anystrong State chose to take it. But such considerations do notdestroy our general principle; they only introduce frictionalforces which delay the operation of crude power.It might be urged that the United States is an exception tothe principle that a State conquers what it can. It is obviousthat the conquest of Mexico, and indeed of all Latin America,would offer no serious difficulties if the United States cared tothe biology of organisations 131undertake the task. The usual motives for political conquest,however, are at present inhibited in this case by various counteractingforces. Before the Civil War, the Southern States hadimperialistic tendencies, which found an outlet in the MexicanWar, leading to the annexation of an immense territory. After theCivil War, the settlement and economic development of the Westwas a sufficient task to absorb the energies of even the mostenergetic national. As soon as this business had been brought tosome sort of conclusion, the Spanish-American War of 1898gave vent to a fresh impulse of imperialism. But annexation ofterritory has difficulties under the American Constitution: itinvolves the admission of new voters, who may be thoughtundesirable, and—what is more important—it extends the areaof internal free trade, and is therefore damaging to importanteconomic interests. The Monroe Doctrine, which involves a virtualprotectorate over Latin America, is therefore more satisfactoryto the dominant interests than annexation would be. Ifpolitical conquest were economically advantageous, no doubt itwould soon take place.Concentration of power, in the political sphere, has alwaysbeen sought by rulers, and has not always been resisted by thoseover whom they ruled. Nominally, it was more complete in thegreat empires of antiquity than in even the most dictatorial ofmodern régimes, but in practice it was limited to what wastechnically possible. The most urgent problem for ancient monarchswas that of mobility. In Egypt and Babylonia, this wasfacilitated by the great rivers; but the Persian rule dependedupon roads. Herodotus describes the great royal road from Sardisto Susa, a distance of about 1,500 miles, along which the King’smessengers travelled in time of peace, and the King’s armies intime of war. ‘The true account of the road in question’, he says,‘is the following: Royal stations exist along its whole length, andexcellent caravanserais; and throughout, it traverses an inhabitedtract, and is free from danger . . . On leaving Phrygia the Halys132 the biology of organisationshas to be crossed; and here are gates through which you mustneeds pass ere you can traverse the stream. A strong force guardsthis post . . . The boundary between Cilicia and Armenia is therivet Euphrates, which it is necessary to cross in boats. In Armeniathe resting-places are fifteen in number, and the distance is56½ parasangs (about 180 miles). There is one place where aguard is posted. Four large streams intersect this district, all ofwhich have to be crossed by means of boats . . . The entirenumber of stations is raised to 111; so many are in fact theresting-places that one finds between Sardis and Suss.’ He goeson to state that, ‘travelling at the rate of 150 furlongs a day’(about the speed of an army), ‘one will take exactly ninety daysto perform the journey.’2Such a road, though it made an extended empire possible, didnot enable the King to exercise any detailed control over thesatraps of distant provinces. A messenger on horseback mightbring news from Sardis to Susa in a month, but an army wouldrequire three months to march from Susa to Sardis. When theIonians revolted against Persia, they therefore had a number ofmonths at their disposal before they had to meet any troops notalready in Asia Minor. All ancient empires suffered from revolts,often led by provincial governors; and even when no overtrevolt occurred, local autonomy was almost unavoidable exceptwhen conquest was recent, and was apt, in the course of time, todevelop into independence. No large State of antiquity was governedfrom the centre to nearly the same extent as is now customary;and the chief reason for this was lack of rapid mobility.The Roman Empire learnt from the Persians, through theMacedonians, how to fortify the central government by meansof roads. Imperial messengers could travel at an average rate often miles an hour, day and night, throughout Western andSouthern Europe, North Africa, and Western Asia. But in each2 Book V, Chapters 52, 53. Rawlinson’s translation.the biology of organisations 133province the imperial post was controlled by the military commander,who could therefore move his armies without theknowledge of anyone not in their line of march. The swiftness ofthe legions and the tardiness of news resulted often in advantageto rebels against the Emperor in Rome. Gibbon, in telling ofConstantine’s march from the north of Gaul to invade Italy,contrasts the ease of his movements with the difficulty ofHannibal’s:When Hannibal marched from Gaul into Italy, he was obliged,first to discover, and then to open, a way over mountains andthrough savage nations that had never yielded a passage to aregular army. The Alps were then guarded by nature, they arenow fortified by art. But in the course of the intermediateperiod, the generals, who have attempted the passage, haveseldom experienced any difficulty or resistance. In the age ofConstantine, the peasants of the mountains were civilised andobedient subjects; the country was plentifully stocked withprovisions, and the stupendous highways, which the Romanshad carried over the Alps, opened several communicationsbetween Gaul and Italy. Constantine preferred the road of theCottian Alps, or as it is now called of Mount Cenis, and led histroops with such active diligence, that he descended into theplain of Piedmont before the court of Maxentius (in Rome) hadreceived any certain intelligence of his departure from thebanks of the Rhine.The result was that Maxentius was defeated and Christianitybecame the religion of the State. The history of the world mighthave been different if the Romans had had worse roads or aswifter means of transmitting news.Steamships, railways, and finally aeroplanes have made it possiblefor governments to exercise power quickly at great distances.A revolt in the Sahara or in Mesopotamia can now be134 the biology of organisationsquelled within a few hours, whereas a hundred years ago itwould have required months to send an army, and there wouldhave been great difficulty in preventing it from dying of thirst,like Alexander’s soldiers in Baluchistan.Quite as important as the mobility of persons and goods is therapidity in the transmission of news. In the war of 1812, thebattle of New Orleans was fought after the conclusion of peace,though neither of the opposing armies was aware of this fact. Atthe end of the Seven Years War, British forces captured Cuba andthe Philippines, but this was not known in Europe until peacehad been signed. Until the invention of the telegraph, ambassadorsin time of peace and generals in time of war had necessarilya very great latitude, since their instructions could not takeaccount of the most recent occurrences. Agents of a distant governmentwere very frequently called upon to act on their ownjudgement, and thus became much more than mere transmittersof a centrally directed policy.It is not only the absolute rapidity in the transmission ofmessages that is important, but also, and still more, the fact thatmessages travel faster than human beings. Until little over a hundredyears ago, neither messages nor anything else could travelfaster than a horse. A highwayman could escape to a neighbouringtown, and reach it before the news of his crime. Nowadays,since news arrives first, escape is more difficult. In time of war allrapid means of communication are controlled by governments,and this greatly increases their power.Modern technique, not only through the rapidity in thetransmission of messages, but also through railways, telegraph,motor traffic, and governmental propaganda, has made largeempires much more capable of stability than they were in formertimes. Persian satraps and Roman proconsuls had enoughindependence to make rebellion easy. Alexander’s empire fellapart at his death. The empires of Attila and Genghis Khanwere transitory; and the nations of Europe lost most of theirthe biology of organisations 135possessions in the New World. But with modern techniquemost empires are fairly safe except against external attack, andrevolution is only to be expected after defeat in war.Technical causes, it should be observed, have not operatedwholly in the direction of making it easier to exercise the powerof the State at a distance; in some respects they have had theopposite effect. Hannibal’s army subsisted for many years withoutkeeping open its line of communications, whereas a largemodern army could not last more than two or three days in suchconditions. Navies, so long as they depended upon sails, wereworld-wide in their operations; now, since they must frequentlyrefuel, they are unable to operate long at a distance from somebase. In Nelson’s day, if the British commanded the seas in oneregion they commanded them everywhere; now, though theymay have command of the home waters, they are weak in the FarEast, and have no access to the Baltic.Nevertheless, the broad rule is that it is easier now than informer days to exert power at a distance from the centre. Theeffect of this is to increase the intensity of competition betweenStates, and to make victory more absolute, since the resultingincrease of size need not impair efficiency. A World State is nowa technical possibility, and might be established by a victor insome really serious world-war, or, more probably, by the mostpowerful of the neutrals.As regards density of power, or intensity of organisation (as itmay also be called), the questions involved are complex and veryimportant. The State, in every civilised country, is far more activenow than at any former time; in Russia, Germany, and Italy itinterferes in almost all human concerns. Since men love power,and since, on the average, those who achieve power love it morethan most, the men who control the State may be expected, innormal circumstances, to desire an increase of its internal activitiesjust as much as an increase of its territory. Since there aresolid reasons for augmenting the functions of the State, there136 the biology of organisationswill be a predisposition, on the part of ordinary citizens, infavour of acquiescing in the wishes of the government in thisrespect. There is, however, a certain desire for independence,which will, at some point, become strong enough to prevent, atleast temporarily, any further increase in the intensity of theorganisation. Consequently love of independence in the citizensand love of power in the officials will, when organisationreaches a certain intensity, be in at least temporary equilibrium,so that if organisation were increased love of independencewould become the stronger force, and if it were diminishedofficial love of power would be the stronger.Love of independence is, in most cases, not an abstract dislikeof external interference, but aversion from some one form ofcontrol which the government thinks desirable—prohibition,conscription, religious conformity, or what not. Sometimes suchsentiments can be gradually overcome by propaganda and education,which can indefinitely weaken the desire for personalindependence. Many forces conspire to make for uniformity inmodern communities—schools, newspapers, cinema, radio,drill, etc. Density of population has the same effect. The positionof momentary equilibrium between the sentiment of independenceand the love of power tends, therefore, under modern conditions,to shift further and further in the direction of power,thus facilitating the creation and success of totalitarian States. Byeducation, love of independence can be weakened to an extentto which, at present, no limits are known. How far the internalpower of the State may be gradually increased without provokingrevolt it is impossible to say; but there seems no reason todoubt that, given time, it can be increased far beyond the pointat present reached even in the most autocratic States.Organisations other than States are, in the main, subject tolaws of the same kind as those that we have been considering,except that they cannot use force. I omit from considerationthose that afford little outlet to power-impulses, such as clubs.the biology of organisations 137The most important for our purposes are political parties,Churches, and business corporations. Most Churches aim atbeing world-wide, however little they may expect their aim to berealised; also most of them endeavour to regulate some of themost intimate concerns of their members, such as marriage andthe education of children. When it has proved possible,Churches have usurped the functions of the State, as in Tibetand the patrimony of St Peter, and to some extent throughoutWestern Europe until the Reformation. The power impulses ofChurches, with some exceptions, have been limited only by lackof opportunity, and by the fear of revolt in the shape of heresy orschism. Nationalism, however, has greatly diminished theirpower in many countries, and has transferred to the State manyemotions which formerly found their outlet in religion.3 Thediminution in the strength of religion is partly the cause andpartly the effect of nationalism and the increased strength ofnational States.Political parties were, until recently, very loose organisations,which made only very slight attempts to control the activitiesof their members. Throughout the nineteenth century, Membersof Parliament frequently voted against their Party leaders, withthe consequence that the results of divisions were far moreunpredictable than they are now. Walpole, North, and theyounger Pitt controlled their supporters, to a certain extent, bymeans of corruption; but after the diminution of corruptions,and while politics was still aristocratic, governments and partyleaders had no way of bringing effective pressure to bear. Now,especially in the Labour Party, men are pledged to orthodoxy,and failure to keep this pledge usually involves both political3 The late W. A. S. Hewins, who was instrumental in the conversion of JosephChamberlain to tariff reform, told me that his ancestors had been ardentRoman Catholics, but that his emotions attached themselves to the BritishEmpire as theirs had to the Church. This was a typical development.138 the biology of organisationsextinction and financial loss. Two kinds of loyalty are demanded:to the programme, in the opinions professed; and to the leaders,in the action taken from day to day. The programme is decidedin a manner which is nominally democratic, but is very muchinfluenced by a small number of wire-pullers. It is left to theleaders to decide, in their parliamentary or governmental activities,whether they shall attempt to carry out the programme; ifthey decide not to do so, it is the duty of their followers tosupport their breach of faith by their votes, while denying, intheir speeches, that it has taken place. It is this system that hasgiven to leaders the power to thwart their rank-and-file supporters,and to advocate reforms without having to enact them.But although the density of organisation in all political partieshas greatly increased, it is still immeasurably less, in democraticparties, than among Communists, Fascists, and Nazis. These latterare a development, historically and psychologically, not ofthe political party, but of the secret society. Under an autocraticgovernment, men who aim at any radical change are driven tosecrecy, and, when they combine, fear of treachery leads to avery strict discipline. It is natural to demand a certain way of life,as a safeguard against spies. The risk, the secrecy, the presentsuffering, and the hope of future triumph, produce a quasireligiousexaltation, and attract those to whom this mood comeseasily. Hence within a revolutionary secret society, even if its aimis anarchism, there is likely to be a very severe despotism, and asupervision extending far beyond what would usually be consideredpolitical activity. Italy after the fall of Napoleon becamefilled with secret societies, to which some were attracted byrevolutionary theory and others by criminal practice. The samething happened in Russia with the rise of terrorism. BothRussian Communists and Italian Fascists were deeply impregnatedwith the mentality of the secret society, and the Nazis weremodelled on them. When their several leaders acquired the government,they ruled the State in the same spirit in which theythe biology of organisations 139had formerly ruled their parties. And the correlative spirit ofsubmission is demanded of their followers throughout theworld.The growth in the size of economic organisations suggestedto Marx his views on the dynamics of power. Much of what hesaid on the subject has proved true, but is applicable to all organisationsthat give an outlet to power-impulses, not only to thosethat have economic functions. The tendency has been, in production,to give rise to trusts that are coextensive with somegreat State and its satellites, but seldom, outside the armamentindustry, to the formation of world-wide trusts. Tariffs and colonieshave caused big business to be intimately associated withthe State. Foreign conquest in the economic sphere has come tobe dependent upon the military strength of the nation to whichthe trust in question belongs; it is no longer, except to a limitedextent, conducted by the old methods of purely business competition.In Italy and Germany the relation between big businessand the State is more intimate and obvious than in democraticcountries, but it would be a mistake to suppose that big business,under Fascism, controls the State more than it does in England,France, or America. On the contrary, in Italy and Germany theState has used the fear of Communism to make itself supremeover big business as over everything else. For example, in Italy avery drastic capital levy is being introduced, whereas a muchmilder form of the same measure, when proposed by the BritishLabour Party, caused a capitalist outcry which was completelysuccessful.When two organisations with different but not incompatibleobjects coalesce, the result is something more powerful thaneither previous one, or even both together. Before the War, theGreat Northern went from London to York, the North Easternfrom York to Newcastle, and the North British from Newcastle toEdinburgh; now the  goes all the way, and is obviouslystronger than the three older Companies put together. Similarly140 the biology of organisationsthere is an advantage if the whole steel industry, from the extractionof the ore to ship-building, is controlled by one corporation.Hence there is a natural tendency to combination; and thisis true not only in the economic sphere. The logical outcome ofthis process is for the most powerful organisation, usually theState, to absorb all others. The same tendency would lead intime to the creation of one World-State, if the purposes of differentStates were not incompatible. If the purpose of States werethe wealth, health, intelligence, or happiness of their citizensthere would be no incompatibility; but since these, singly andcollectively, are thought less important than national power,the purposes of different States conflict, and cannot be furtheredby amalgamation. Consequently a World-State is only to beexpected, if at all, through the conquest of the world by someone national State, or through the universal adoption of somecreed transcending nationalism, such as first socialism, and thencommunism, seemed to be in their early days.The limitation to the growth of States owing to nationalism isthe most important example of a limitation which may be seenalso in party politics and in religion. I have been endeavouring inthis chapter to treat organisations as having a life independent oftheir purpose. I think it important to note that, up to a point, thisis possible; but of course it is only up to a point that it is possible.Beyond that point, it is necessary to consider the passion towhich the organisation appeals.The desires of an individual can be collected into groups, eachgroup constituting what some psychologists call a ‘sentiment’.There will be—to take politically important sentiments—love ofhome, of family, of country, love of power, love of enjoyment,and so on; there will also be sentiments of aversion, such as fearof pain, laziness, dislike of foreigners, hatred of alien creeds, andso on. A man’s sentiments at any given moment are a complicatedproduct of his nature, his past history, and his presentcircumstances. Each sentiment, in so far as it is one which manythe biology of organisations 141men can gratify cooperatively better than singly, will, givenopportunity, generate one or more organisations designed for itsgratification. Take, for example, family sentiment. This has givenrise, or has helped to give rise, to organisations for housing,education, and life insurance, which are matters in which theinterests of different families are in harmony. But it has also—inthe past more than in the present—given rise to organisationsrepresenting the interests of one family at the expense of others,such as those of the retainers of the Montagues and Capuletsrespectively. The dynastic State was an organisation of this sort.Aristocracies are organisations of certain families to procuretheir own privileges at the expense of the rest of the community.Such organisations always involve, in a greater or less degree,sentiments of aversion: fear, hatred, contempt, and so on. Wheresuch sentiments are strongly felt, they are an obstacle to thegrowth of organisations.Theology affords illustrations of this limitation. The Jews,except during a few centuries round about the beginning of theChristian era, have had no wish to convert the Gentiles; theyhave been content with the feeling of superiority which theyderived from being the Chosen People. Shinto, which teachesthat Japan was created earlier than the rest of the world, is notintended or likely to appeal to those who are not Japanese.Everyone knows the story of the Auld Lichts arriving in heaven,and being prevented from discovering that there were otherpeople there, for fear of spoiling their enjoyment of celestialbliss. The same kind of sentiment may take a more sinister form:persecution may be so pleasant to the persecutor that he wouldfind a world without heretics intolerably dull. Similarly Hitlerand Mussolini, since they teach that war is the noblest of humanactivities, could not be happy if they had conquered the worldand had no enemies left to fight. In like manner, party politicsbecome uninteresting as soon as one party has unquestionablesupremacy.142 the biology of organisationsThus an organisation which derives its appeal to the individualfrom such motives as pride, envy, hate, contempt, orpleasure in contest,4 cannot fulfil its purpose if it is world-wide.In a world where such passions are strong, an organisationwhich becomes world-wide is pretty sure to break up, since itwill have lost its motive force.It will be seen that, in what has just been said, we have beenconsidering rather the sentiments of ordinary members of organisationsthan those of their governments. Whatever the purposeof an organisation, its government derives satisfaction frompower, and has, in consequence, an interest not identical withthat of the members. The desire for universal conquest is thereforelikely to be stronger in the government than in the members.Nevertheless, there is an important difference between thedynamics of organisations embodying sentiments to be realisedby cooperation and that of those whose purposes essentiallyinvolve conflict. This is a large subject, and for the present Iam merely concerned to point out the limitations to the study oforganisations without regard to their purposes.I have spoken of the growth of an organisation, and of itscompetition with rivals. To complete the Darwinian analogy,something should be said about decay and old age. The fact thatmen are mortal is not, in itself, a reason for expecting organisationsto die, and yet most of them do. Sometimes they suffer aviolent death from without, but this is not what, at the moment,I wish to consider. What I wish to consider is the feebleness andslowness of movement, analogous to that of old men, which isoften seen in old organisations. One of the best examples is theChinese Empire before the revolution of 1911. It was by far themost ancient government in the world; it had shown militaryprowess at the time of the rise of Rome, and during the great4 I am excluding merely sporting contests, which can be organised within asingle governing authority such as the MCC.the biology of organisations 143days of the Caliphate; it had a continuous tradition of high civilisation,and a long-established practice of government by ablemen chosen through the medium of competitive examination.The strength of the tradition, the tyranny of centuries of habit,was the cause of collapse. It was impossible for the literati tounderstand that other knowledge than that of the Confucianclassics was needed for coping with the nations of the West, orthat the maxims which had been adequate against semibarbarianfrontier races were of no avail against Europeans. Whatmakes an organisation grow old is habit based upon success;when new circumstances arise, the habit is too strong to beshaken off. In revolutionary times, those who have the habit ofcommand never realise soon enough that they can no longercount upon the correlative habit of obedience. Moreover therespect exacted by exalted persons, originally with a view toconfirming their authority, in time develops into a stiff etiquettethat hampers them in action and prevents them from acquiringthe knowledge needed for success. Kings can no longer lead inbattle because they are too sacred; they cannot be told unpalatabletruths, because they would execute the teller. In time theybecome mere symbols, and some day people wake up to the factthat they symbolise nothing of any value.There is, however, no reason why all organisations should bemortal. The American Constitution, for example, does not investany man or body of men with the kind of reverence that leads toignorance and impotence, nor does it readily lend itself, exceptto some extent in relation to the Supreme Court, to the accumulationof habits and maxims which prevent adaptation to newcircumstances. There is no obvious reason why an organisationof this sort should not persist indefinitely. I think, therefore, that,while most organisations perish sooner or later, either fromrigidity or from external causes, there is no inherent reasonwhich makes this unavoidable. At this point, the biologicalanalogy, if pressed, becomes misleading.144 the biology of organisations12POWERS AND FORMSOF GOVERNMENTSApart from the purpose of an organisation, its most importantcharacteristics are (1) size, (2) power over members, (3) powerover non-members, (4) form of goverment. The question of sizeI shall consider in the next chapter; the others are to form ourpresent topic.Legally tolerated organisations other than the State havepowers over their members which are strictly limited by law. Ifyou are a barrister, a solicitor, a medical man, or an owner ofracehorses, you may be disbarred, struck off the rolls, disqualifiedor warned off the turf. All these punishments involve disgrace,and the first three are likely to involve extreme economichardship. But however unpopular you may be in your profession,your colleagues cannot legally do more than prevent youfrom practising it. If you are a politician, you must be of themachine; but you cannot be prevented from joining anotherparty or from living a peaceful life remote from parliamentarycontests. The powers of organisations other than the State overtheir members depend upon the right of expulsion, and aremore or less severe according to the degree of obloquy andfinancial hardship attached to expulsion.The powers of the State over its citizens are, on the contrary,unlimited, except in so far as constitutional provisions may forbidarbitrary arrest or spoliation. In the United States, no mancan be deprived of life, liberty, or property except by due processof law, i.e. by the demonstration to the judicial authoritiesthat he has been guilty of some act previously declared deservingof such punishment. In England, although the powers of theexecutive are similarly limited, the legislature is omnipotent: itcan pass an Act to the effect that Mr John Smith is to be put todeath, or deprived of his property, without the necessity ofestablishing that he has committed a crime. In the form of Actsof Attainder, this power was one of the means by which Parliamentacquired control of the government. In India and in totalitarianStates, this power belongs to the executive, and is freelyexercised. This is in accordance with tradition, and where Stateshave lost this omnipotence they have done so as a result of thedoctrine of the Rights of Man.The powers of organisations over non-members are less easyto define. The powers of a State in relation to foreigners dependupon war and the threat of war; this applies even to such mattersas tariffs and immigration laws, both of which, in China, wereregulated by treaties accepted as a result of military defeat. Nothingbut lack of military force limits the power of one State overanother; given sufficient preponderance, even extermination orremoval of the whole population may be decreed, and often hasbeen. Consider, for example, the Book of Joshua, the Babyloniancaptivity, and the confinement of North American Indians toreservations when not exterminated.The external powers of private orgenisations are apt to beregarded by the State with jealousy, and are therefore largelyextra-legal. They depend mainly upon the boycott and other146 powers and forms of governmentsmore extreme forms of intimidation. Such terroristic influenceis usually a prelude to revolution or anarchy. In Ireland, assassinationbrought about the downfall, first of the landlords, and thenof the English domination. In Tsarist Russia, the revolutionariesdepended very largely upon terroristic methods. The Nazis wontheir way by acts of illegal violence. At the present moment,in Czechoslovakia, those among the German populatlon whowill not join Henlein’s party receive such notices as ‘you are amarked man’ or ‘your turn will come’; and in view of whathappened to opponents when the Germans occupied Austria,such threats are very effective. A State which cannot cope withthis kind of illegality usually soon comes to grief. If the illegalityis, that of a single organisation with a definite political programme,the result is revolution, but if it is that of bands ofbrigands or mutinous soldiers, there may be a lapse into mereanarchy and chaos.In democratic countries, the most important private organisationsare economic. Unlike secret societies, they are able toexercise their terrorism without illegality, since they do notthreaten to kill their enemies, but only to starve them. By meansof such threats—which do not need to be explicitly uttered—they have frequently even defeated governments, for examplerecently in France. So long as private organisations can decidewhether individuals not belonging to them shall, or shall not,have enough to eat, the power of the State is obviously subjectto very serious limitations. In Germany and Italy, no less than inRussia, the State has become supreme over private capital in thisrespect.I come now to the question of forms of government, and it isnatural to begin with absolute monarchy, as the oldest, simplest,and most widespread of the constitutions known in historicaltimes. I am not now distinguishing between the king and thetyrant; I am considering simply one-man rule, whether that of ahereditary king or that of a usurper. This form of governmentpowers and forms of governments 147has prevailed in Asia at all times, from the beginning of Babylonianrecords through the Persian monarchy, the Macedonian andRoman domination, and the Caliphate, to the days of the GreatMogul. In China, it is true, the Emperor was not absolute, exceptduring the reign of Shih Huang Ti (third century ..), whoburnt the books; at other times, the literati could usually defeathim. But China has always been an exception to all rules. At thepresent day, though absolute monarchy is supposed to be indecline, something very like it prevails in Germany, Italy, Russia,Turkey, and Japan. It is evident that this form of government isone which men find natural.Psychologically, its merits are clear. In general, the ruler leadssome tribe or sect to conquest, and his followers feel themselvespartakers in his glory. Cyrus led the Persians in revolt against theMedes; Alexander gave power and wealth to his Macedonians;Napoleon brought victory to the armies of the Revolution. Therelations of Lenin and Hitler to their parties were of the samesort. The tribe or sect of which the conqueror is the head followshim willingly, and feels itself magnified by his successes; thosewhom he subdues feel fear mixed with admiration. No politicaltraining, no habit of compromise, is required; the only instinctivesocial cohesion that is necessary is that of the small innerband of followers, which is rendered easy by the fact that alldepend upon the hero’s achievements. When he dies, his workmay fall to pieces, like that of Alexander; but with luck an ablesuccessor may carry it on until the new power has becometraditional.The difficulty of any other relation between men, as a bonduniting them in one community, except that of command andobedience, may be illustrated by the relations of States. There areinnumerable instances of small States growing into great empiresby conquest, but hardly any of voluntary federation. For Greecein the time of Philip, and Italy in the Renaissance, some degreeof cooperation between different sovereign States was a matter148 powers and forms of governmentsof life or death, and yet it could not be brought about. The samething is true of Europe in the present day. It is not easy to inducemen who have the habit of command, or even only of independence,to submit voluntarily to an external authority. When thisdoes happen, it is usually in such a case as a gang of pirates,where a small group hopes for great gains at the expense of thegeneral public, and has such confidence in a leader as to bewilling to leave the direction of the enterprise in his hands. It isonly in this kind of situation that we can speak of governmentarising from a ‘social contract’, and in this case the contract isHobbes’s rather than Rousseau’s—i.e. it is a contract which thecitizens (or pirates) fake with each other, not a contract betweenthem and their leader. The psychologically important point isthat men are only willing to agree to such a contract when thereare great possibilities of plunder or conquest. It is this psychologicalmechanism, though usually not in an overt form, whichhas enabled kings who were not absolute to become more nearlyso by successful war.The conclusion to be derived from these considerations isthat, while something like voluntary consent to the arbitrarypower of a monarch is necessary from a band of companionswho are near the throne, the majority of his subjects usuallysubmit, at first from fear, and afterwards as the result of customand tradition. The ‘social contract’, in the only sense in which itis not completely mythical, is a contract among conquerors, whichloses its raison d’être if they are deprived of the benefits of conquest.So far us the majority of subjects are concerned, fear,rather than consent, is the original cause of submission to a kingwhose power extends beyond a single tribe.It is because the motives of loyalty in an inner group andfear in the general population are so simple and easy that almostall enlargement in the areas of sovereign States has been by conquest,not by voluntary federation; and it is also for this reasonthat monarchy has played such a great part in history.powers and forms of governments 149Monarchy has, however, very great disadvantages. If it ishereditary, it is unlikely that the rulers will continue to be able;and if there is any uncertainty about the law of succession, therewill be dynastic civil wars. In the East, a new ruler usually beganby putting his brothers to death; but if one of them escaped heset up a claim to the throne as the only chance of avoidingexecution. Read, for example, Mainucci’s Storia do Mogor, whichdeals with the Great Moguls, and makes it evident that wars ofsuccession did more than anything else to weaken their empire.In our own country the Wars of the Roses point the same moral.If, on the other hand, the monarchy is not hereditary, there iseven more likelihood of civil war. This danger is illustrated bythe Roman Empire from the death of Commodus to the accessionof Constantine. Only one really successful solution of thisproblem has ever been devised: it is the method by which thePope is elected. But this is the ultimate term of a developmentwhich started from democracy; and even in this case the GreatSchism shows that the method is not infallible.A still more serious disadvantage of monarchy is the fact thatit is usually indifferent to the interests of subjects, except whenthey are identical with those of the king. Identity of interest islikely to exist up to a point. The king has an interest in suppressinginternal anarchy, and will therefore be supported by the lawabidingsection of his subjects whenever the danger of anarchy isgreat. He has an interest in the wealth of his subjects, since itmakes the taxes more productive. In foreign war, the interests ofthe king and his subjects will be thought to be identical so longas he is victorious. So long as he continues to extend his dominions,the inner group, to whom he is a leader rather than amaster, will find his service profitable. But kings are led astray bytwo causes: pride, and reliance upon an inner group which haslost its power of command. As for pride: though the Egyptiansendured the Pyramids, the French, in the end, grumbled aboutVersailles and the Louvre; and moralists have always inveighed150 powers and forms of governmentsagainst the luxury of courts. ‘Wine is wicked, women arewicked, the king is wicked,’ we are told in the Apocrypha.The other cause for the decay of monarchy is more important.Kings acquire the habit of relying upon some section of thepopulation: the aristocracy, the Church, the higher bourgeoisie,or perhaps a geographical group, such as the Cossacks. Graduallyeconomic or cultural changes diminish the power of thefavoured group, and the king shares their unpopularity. He mayeven, like Nicholas II, be so unwise as to lose the support of thegroups that should be most completely on his side; but this isexceptional. Charles I and Louis XVI were supported by the aristocracy,but fell because the middle class was opposed to them.A king or despot can maintain his power if he is astute ininternal politics and successful externally. If he is quasi-divine,his dynasty may be prolonged indefinitely. But the growth ofcivilisation puts an end to belief in his divinity; defeat in war isnot always avoidable; and political astuteness cannot be aninvariable attribute of monarchs. Therefore sooner or later, ifthere is no external conquest, there is revolution, and themonarchy is either abolished or shorn of its power.The natural successor to absolute monarchy is oligarchy. Butoligarchy may be of many sorts; it may be the rule of a hereditaryaristocracy, of the rich, or of a Church or political party.These produce very different results. A hereditary landed aristocracyis apt to be conservative, proud, stupid, and rather brutal;for these reasons among others, it is always worsted in a strugglewith the higher bourgeoisie. A government of the rich prevailedin all the free cities of the Middle Ages, and survived in Veniceuntil Napoleon extinguished it. Such governments have been, onthe whole, more enlightened and astute than any others knownto history. Venice, in particular, steered a prudent course throughcenturies of complicated intrigue, and had a diplomatic servicefar more efficient than that of any other State. Money made incommerce is made by cleverness which is not dictatorial, andpowers and forms of governments 151this characteristic is displayed by governments composed ofsuccessful merchants. The modern industrial magnate is a totallydifferent type, partly because he deals largely with the technicalmanipulation of materials, partly because his dealings withhuman beings are preponderantly with an army of employeesrather than with equals who must be persuaded, not coerced.Government by a Church or political party—which may becalled a theocracy—is a form of oligarchy which has assumed anew importance in recent years. It had an older form, whichsurvived in the Patrimony of St Peter and in the Jesuit régimein Paraguay, but its modern form begins with Calvin’s rule inGeneva—apart from the very brief sway of the Anabaptists inMünster. Still more modern was the Rule of the Saints, whichended in England at the Restoration, but survived for a considerableperiod in New England. In the eighteenth and nineteenthcenturies, this type of government might have been thoughtpermanently extinct. But it was revived by Lenin, adopted inItaly and Germany, and seriously attempted in China.In a country such as Russia or China, where the bulk of thepopulation is illiterate and without political experience, the successfulrevolutionary found himself in a very difficult situation.Democracy on Western lines could not possibly succeed; it wasattempted in China, but was a fiasco from the first. On the otherhand, the revolutionary parties in Russia had nothing but contemptfor the territorial aristocracy and the rich of the middleclass; none of the objects they had in view could be achieved byan oligarchy chosen from these classes. They accordingly said:‘We, the party that has made the revolution, will retain politicalpower until such time as the country is ripe for democracy; andmeanwhile we will educate the country in our principles.’The result, however, was not quite what the Old Bolshevikshad hoped. Under the stress of civil war, famine, and peasantdiscontent, the dictatorship became gradually more severe,while the struggle within the Communist Party after the death of152 powers and forms of governmentsLenin transformed it from government by a Party to one-manrule. All this was not difficult to foresee. I wrote in 1920: ‘TheBolshevik theory requires that every country, sooner or later,should go through what Russia is going through now. And inevery country in such a condition we may expect to find thegovernment falling into the hands of ruthless men, who have notby nature any love for freedom, and who will see little importancein hastening the transition from dictatorship to freedom. . . Is it not almost inevitable that men placed as the Bolsheviksare placed in Russia . . . will be loath to relinquish their monopolyof power, and will find reasons for remaining until somenew revolution ousts them?’ For such reasons, it is difficult toregard a theocracy as a step towards democracy, though in otherrespects it may have merits.The merits of theocracies, when they represent some newcreed, are sometimes very great, and sometimes almost nonexistent.In the first place, the believers form a nucleus for socialcohesion after revolution, and they can easily cooperate becausethey agree on fundamentals; it is therefore possible for them toestablish a vigorous government that knows its own mind. Inthe second place, as already observed, the Party or Church is aminority not of birth or wealth, to which it is possible to entrustpolitical power where democracy, for whatever reason, mustfail. In the third place, the believers are almost sure to be moreenergetic and politically conscious than the average of the population,to whom, in many instances, they have also been superiorintellectually. Certain creeds, however—including some thathave become powerful—attract only stupid people, apart fromthe leaven of adventurers in search of jobs. Intelligence, therefore,is a characteristic of only some among theocracies.When power is confined to the members of one sect, thereis inevitably a severe ideological censorship. Sincere believerswill be anxious to spread the true faith; others will be contentwith outward conformity. The former attitude kills the freepowers and forms of governments 153exercise of intelligence; the latter promotes hypocrisy. Educationand literature must be stereotyped, and designed to producecredulity rather than initiative and criticism. If the leaders areinterested in their own theology, there will be heresies, andorthodoxy will come to be more and more rigidly defined. Menwho are strongly influenced by a creed differ from the average intheir power to be moved by something more or less abstract andmore or less remote from daily life. If such men control anunpopular government, the result is to make the bulk of thepopulation even more frivolous and thoughtless than it wouldnaturally be—a result which is much promoted by the knowledgethat all thought is potentially heretical, and therefore dangerous.The rulers, in a theocracy, are likely to be fanatics; beingfanatics, they will be severe; being severe, they will be opposed;being opposed, they will become more severe. Their powerimpulseswill wear, even to themselves, the cloak of religiouszeal, and will therefore be subject to no restraint. Hence the rackand the stake, the Gestapo and the Cheka.We have seen that monarchy and oligarchy have both meritsand demerits. The principal demerit of both is that, sooner orlater, the government becomes so indifferent to the desires ofordinary men that there is revolution. Democracy, when firmlyestablished, is a safeguard against this kind of instability. Sincecivil war is a very grave evil, a form of government which makesit unlikely is to be commended. Now civil war is unlikely where,if it occurred, it would give victory to the previous holders ofpower. Other things being equal, if power is in the hands of themajority, the government is more likely to win in a civil warthan if it represents only a minority. This, so far as it goes, is anargument for democracy; but various recent instances show thatit is subject to many limitations.A government is usually called ‘democratic’ if a fairly largepercentage of the population has a share of political power. Themost extreme Greek democracies excluded women and slaves,154 powers and forms of governmentsand America considered itself a democracy before women hadthe vote. Clearly an oligarchy approaches more nearly to a democracyas the percentage possessed of political power increases.The characteristic features of oligarchy only appear when thispercentage is rather small.In all organisations, but especially in States, the problem ofgovernment is twofold. From the point of view of the government,the problem is to secure acquiescence from the governed;from the point of view of the governed, the problem is to makethe government take account, not only of its own interests, butalso of the interests of those over whom it has power. If either ofthese problems is completely solved, the other does not arise; ifneither is solved, there is revolution. But as a rule a compromisesolution is reached. Apart from brute force, the principal factorson the government side are tradition, religion, fear of foreignenemies, and the natural desire of most men to follow a leader.For the protection of the governed, only one method has beenhitherto discovered which is in any degree effective, namely,democracy.Democracy, as a method of government, is subject to somelimitations which are essential, and to others which are, in principle,avoidable. The essential limitations arise chiefly from twosources: some decisions must be speedy, and others requireexpert knowledge. When Great Britain abandoned the goldstandard in 1931, both factors were involved: it was absolutelynecessary to act quickly, and the questions involved were such asmost men could not understand. The democracy, therefore,could only express its opinion retrospectively. War, though lesstechnical than currency, has even more urgency: it is possible toconsult Parliament or Congress (though as a rule this is somethingof a farce, since the issue will have been already decided infact, if not in form), but it is impossible to consult the electorate.Owing to these essential limitations, many of the mostimportant matters must be entrusted by the electorate to thepowers and forms of governments 155Government. Democracy is successful in so far as the Governmentis obliged to respect public opinion. The Long Parliamentdecreed that it could not be dissolved without its own consent;what has hindered subsequent Parliaments from doing likewise?The answer is neither simple nor reassuring. In the first place, inthe absence of a revolutionary situation, members of the outgoingParliament were assured of a pleasant life even if theybelonged to the defeated party; most of them would be reelected,and, if they lost the pleasures of government, theywould gain the almost equal satisfactions to be obtained by publiclycriticising the mistakes of their rivals. And in due coursethey would return to power. If, on the other hand, they made itimpossible for the electorate to get rid of them by constitutionalmeans, they would create a revolutionary situation, whichwould endanger their property and perhaps their lives. The fateof Strafford and Charles I was a warning against rashness.All this would be different if a revolutionary situation werealready in existence. Suppose a Conservative Parliament had reasonto fear that the next election would produce a Communistmajority, which would expropriate private property withoutcompensation. In such a case, the party in power might wellimitate the Long Parliament, and decree its own perpetuity. Itwould hardly be restrained from this action by reverence for theprinciples of democracy; it would be restrained, if at all, only bya doubt as to the loyalty of the armed forces.The moral is that a democracy, since it is compelled to entrustpower to elected representatives, cannot feel any security that, in arevolutionary situation, its representatives will continue to representits wishes. The wishes of Parliament may, in easily conceivablecircumstances, be opposed to those of a majority of thenation. If Parliament, in such circumstances, can rely upon a preponderanceof force, it may thwart the majority with impunity.This is not to say that there is a better form of governmentthan democracy. It is only to say that there are issues as to which156 powers and forms of governmentsmen will fight, and when they arise no form of government canprevent civil war. One of the most important purposes of governmentshould be to prevent issues from becoming so acute asto lead to civil war; and from this point of view democracy,where it is habitual, is probably preferable to any other knownform of government.The difficulty of democracy, as a form of government, is thatit demands a readiness for compromise. The beaten party mustnot consider that a principle is involved of such importance as tomake it pusillanimous to yield; on the other hand, the majoritymust not press the advantage to the point at which it provokes arevolt. This requires practice, respect for the law, and the habit ofbelieving that opinions other than one’s own may not be a proofof wickedness. What is even more necessary, there must not be astate of acute fear, for, when there is such a state, men look for aleader and submit to him when found, with the result that heprobably becomes a dictator. Given these conditions, democracyis capable of being the most stable form of government hithertodevised. In the United States, Great Britain, the Dominions,Scandinavia, and Switzerland, it runs hardly any danger exceptfrom without; in France it is becoming more and more firmlyestablished. And in addition to stability, it has the merit ofmaking governments pay some attention to the welfare of theirsubjects—not, perhaps, as much as might be wished, but verymuch more than is shown by absolute monarchies, oligarchies,or dictatorships.Democracy, in a modern great State, has certain disadvantages,not, indeed, as compared with other forms of government overthe same area, but inevitably owing to the immense populationconcerned. In antiquity, the representative system beingunknown, the citizens assembled in the marketplace voted personallyon each issue. So long as the State was confined to asingle city, this gave to each citizen a sense of real power andresponsibility, the more so as most of the issues were such as hispowers and forms of governments 157own experience enabled him to understand. But owing to theabsence of an elected legislature, democracy could not extendover a wider area. When Roman citizenship was granted to theinhabitants of other parts of Italy, the new citizens could not, inpractice, acquire any share of political power, since this couldonly be exercised by those who were actually in Rome. Thegeographical difficulty was overcome, in the modern world, bythe practice of choosing representatives. Until very recently, therepresentative, once chosen, had considerable independentpower, since men living at a distance from the capital could notknow what was happening soon enough, or in sufficient detail,to be able to express their opinion effectively. Now, however,owing to broadcasting, rapid mobility, newspapers, etc., largecountries have become more and more like the City States ofantiquity; there is more personal contact (of a sort) betweenmen at the centre and voters at a distance; followers can bringpressure on leaders, and leaders reciprocally can exert influenceon followers, to an extent which was impossible in the eighteenthand nineteenth centuries. The result has been to diminishthe importance of the representative and increase that of theleader. Parliaments are no longer effective intermediariesbetween voters and governments. All the dubious propagandistdevices formerly confined to election times can now beemployed continuously. The Greek City State, with its demagogues,tyrants, body-guards, and exiles, has revived because itsmethods of propaganda have again become available.Except when he feels enthusiasm for a leader, the voter in alarge democracy has so little sense of power that he often doesnot think it worth while to use his vote. If he is not a keenpropagandist for one of the parties, the vastness of the forces thatdecide who shall govern makes his own part in them appearcompletely negligible. In practice, all that he can do, as a rule, isto vote for one or other of two men, whose programmes maynot interest him, and may differ very little, and who, he knows,158 powers and forms of governmentsmay with impunity abandon their programmes as soon as theyare elected. If, on the other hand, there is a leader whom heenthusiastically admires, the psychology involved is that whichwe considered in connection with monarchy: it is that of the tiebetween a king and the tribe or sect of his active supporters.Every skilful political agitator or organiser devotes himself tostimulating devotion to an individual. If the individual is a greatleader, the result is one-man government; if he is not, the caucuswhich has secured his election becomes the real power.This is not true democracy. The question of the preservationof democracy when governmental areas are large is a verydifficult one, to which I shall return in a later chapter.So far, we have, been concerned with the forms of governmentin politics. But the forms which occur in economic organisationsare so important and peculiar that they require separateconsideration.In an industrial undertaking, there is, to begin with, a distinctionanalogous to that between citizens and slaves in antiquity.The citizens are those who have invested capital in the undertaking,while the slaves are the employees. I do not wish to pressthat analogy. The employee differs from a slave in the fact that heis free to change his job if he can, and in his right to spend hisnon-working hours as he pleases. The analogy that I wish tobring out is in relation to government. Tyrannies, oligarchies,and democracies differed in their relations to free men; in relationto slaves, they were all alike. Similarly in a capitalist industrialenterprise the power may be divided among investorsmonarchically, oligarchically, or democratically, but employees,unless they are investors, have no share in it whatever, and arethought to have as little claim as slaves were thought to have inantiquity.Business corporations exhibit a great variety of oligarchicalforms of constitution. I am not thinking, at the moment, of thefact that the employees are excluded from the management; I ampowers and forms of governments 159thinking only of the shareholders. The best account of this subjectknown to me is in a book to which I have already alluded,The Modern Corporation and Private Property, by Berle and Means. Ina chapter called ‘The Evolution of Control’, they show howoligarchies, often with very small participation in ownership,have acquired the government of vast aggregations of capital. Bymeans of devices concerned with the proxy committee, themanagement ‘can virtually dictate their own successors. Whereownership is sufficiently subdivided, the management can thusbecome a self-perpetuating body even though its share in theownership is negligible. The nearest approach to this conditionwhich the present writer has been able to discover elsewhere isthe organisation which dominates the Catholic Church. ThePope selects the Cardinals and the College of Cardinals in turnselects the succeeding Pope.’1 This form of government exists insome of the largest existing corporations, such as the AmericanTelephone and Telegraph Company, and the United States SteelCorporation, with assets (on 1st January, 1930) of four billionand two billion dollars respectively. In the latter, the directorscollectively own only 1.4 per cent of the shares; yet the economicpower is wholly theirs.The complexity of the organisation of a business corporationis apt to be greater than that of any political institution.Directors, shareholders, debenture holders, executive staff, andordinary employees, all have different functions. The governmentis usually in form an oligarchy, of which the units areshares, not shareholders, and the directors are their chosenrepresentatives. In practice, the directors usually have muchmore power, as against the shareholders, than belongs to thegovernment of a political oligarchy as against the individualoligarchs. Per contra, where trade unionism is well organised, theemployees have a considerable voice as to the terms of their1 Op. cit., pp. 87–8.160 powers and forms of governmentsemployment. In capitalistic enterprises there is a peculiar dualityof purpose: on the one hand they exist to provide goods orservices for the public, and on the other hand they aim at providingprofits for the shareholders. In political organisations, thepoliticians are supposed to be aiming at the public good, notonly at maximising their own salaries; this pretence is kept upeven under despotisms. This is why there is more hypocrisy inpolitics than in business. But under the combined influence ofdemocracy and socialistic criticism, many important industrialmagnates have acquired the art of political humbug, and havelearnt to pretend that the public good is their motive for makinga fortune. This is another example of the modern tendency tothe coalescence of politics and economics.Something must be said as to the ways in which, in a giveninstitution, the forms of government change. This is a matter asto which history gives no sure guidance. We have seen that, inEgypt and Babylonia, absolute monarchy was fully developed atthe period when historical records begin; from anthropologicalevidence, it may be presumed to have developed out of theauthority of chiefs originally limited by a Council of Elders.Throughout Asia (excluding China), absolute monarchy hasnever, except under European influence, shown any sign of givingway to any other form of government. In Europe, on thecontrary, it has never, in historical times, been stable for longperiods. In the Middle Ages, the power of kings was limited bythat of the feudal nobility, as well as by the municipal autonomyof the more important commercial cities. After the Renaissance,the power of kings increased throughout Europe, but thisincrease was brought to an end by the rise of the middle class,first in England, then in France and then in the rest of WesternEurope. Until the Bolsheviks dismissed the Constituent Assemblyat the beginning of 1918 it might have been thought thatparliamentary democracy was certain to prevail throughout thecivilised world.powers and forms of governments 161Movements away from democracy are, however, no new thing.They occurred in many Greek City States, in Rome when theEmpire was established, and in the commercial republics ofmediaeval Italy. Is it possible to discover any general principlesdetermining the various developments towards or away fromdemocracy?The two great influences against democracy in the past havebeen wealth and war. We may take the Medici and Napoleon asillustrating these two. Men whose wealth is obtained by commerceare, as a rule, less harsh and more conciliatory than thosewhose power is due to ownership of land; they are, therefore,more skilful in buying their way into power, and governingafterwards so as not to rouse violent resentments, than are thosewhose status is merely hereditary and traditional. The gainsmade in commerce, for example in Venice or in the towns of theHanseatic League, were made at the expense of the foreigner, andaccordingly aroused no unpopularity at home, such as attachesto the manufacturer who makes his fortune by employingsweated labour. An oligarchy of substantial burghers is thereforethe most natural and stable form of government for a predominantlycommercial community. And this easily develops intomonarchy if one family is much richer than any other.War operates by a different and more violent psychology. Fearmakes men wish for a leader, and a successful general rouses thepassionate admiration which is the obverse of fear. Since victoryseems, at the moment, the one thing of real importance, thesuccessful general easily persuades his country to entrust himwith supreme power. So long as the crisis continues, he is judgedindispensable, and when it is over he may have become verydifficult to remove.The modern movements against democracy, though theyare connected with a war mentality, are not quite analogous tothe case of Napoleon. Broadly speaking, the German and Italiandemocracies fell, not because a majority was tired of democracy,162 powers and forms of governmentsbut because the preponderance of armed force was not on theside of numerical majority. It may seem strange that the civilgovernment should ever be stronger than the commanderin-chief, yet this is the case wherever democracy is firmly rootedin the habits of the nation. Lincoln, in appointing a commanderin-chief, wrote: ‘They tell me that you aim at dictatorship. Theway to achieve this is to win victories. I look to you for thevictories, and I will risk the dictatorship.’ He could safely do so,because no American army would have followed a generalin an attack upon the civil government. In the seventeenthcentury, Cromwell’s soldiers were quite willing to obey himin dismissing the Long Parliament; in the nineteenth, the Dukeof Wellington, if he had ever harboured such a project, could nothave got a man to follow him.Democracy, when it is new, arises from resentment against theprevious holders of power; but so long as it is new it is unstable.Men who represent themselves as enemies of the old monarchsor oligarchs may succeed in restoring a monarchical or oligarchicalsystem: Napoleon and Hitler could win public supportwhen the Bourbons and Hohenzollern could not. It is only wheredemocracy has lasted long enough to become traditional that it isstable. Cromwell, Napoleon, and Hitler appeared in the early daysof democracy in their respective countries; in view of the, firsttwo, the third should be in no way surprising. Nor is there reasonto suppose him more permanent than his predecessors.There are, however, some serious reasons for doubtingwhether, in the near future, democracy is likely to recover theprestige that it had in the latter half of the nineteenth century.We have been saying that, in order to become stable, it mustbecome traditional. What chance has it of becoming sufficientlyestablished in Eastern Europe and Asia to begin the process ofbecoming traditional?Government has at all times been greatly affected by militarytechnique. In the days when Rome was tending towardspowers and forms of governments 163democracy, Roman armies were composed of Roman citizens; itwas the substitution of professional armies that brought aboutthe Empire. The strength of the feudal aristocracy dependedupon the impregnability of castles, which ended with the introductionof artillery. The large almost untrained armies of theFrench Revolution, by defeating the small professional armiesopposed to them, showed the importance of popular enthusiasmfor the cause, and thereby suggested the military advantages ofdemocracy. We seem now, through the aeroplane, to be returningto the need for forces composed of comparatively few highlytrained men. It is to be expected, therefore, that the form ofgovernment, in every country exposed to serious war, will besuch as airmen will like, which is not likely to be democracy.But there are certain considerations to be set against this. Itmay be assumed that the United States, whether a belligerent ornot, will be the only victor in the Great War, and it is improbablethat the United States will cease to be a democracy. Much of thestrength of Fascism is due to its supposed advantages in war, andif these prove to be non-existent democracy may again spreadeastward. In the long run, nothing gives a nation such strengthin war as the wide diffusion of education and patriotism; andalthough patriotism may, for the moment, be stimulated by therevivalist methods of Fascism, such methods, as long experiencein the religious sphere has proved, inevitably lead in the end toweariness and backsliding. On the whole, therefore, the militaryarguments point to the survival of democracy where it still existsand its return to the countries in which it is for the moment ineclipse. But it must be admitted that the opposite alternative is byno means impossible.164 powers and forms of governments13ORGANISATIONS AND THEINDIVIDUALHuman beings find it profitable to live in communities, buttheir desires, unlike those of bees in a hive, remain largely individual;hence arises the difficulty of social life and the need ofgovernment. For, on the one hand, government is necessary:without it, only a very small percentage of the population ofcivilised countries could hope to survive, and that in a state ofpitiable destitution. But, on the other hand, governmentinvolves inequalities of power, and those who have most powerwill use it to further their own desires as opposed to those ofordinary citizens. Thus anarchy and despotism are alike disastrous,and some compromise is necessary if human beings areto be happy.In the present chapter, I wish to consider the organisationsconcerned with a given individual, not the individuals concernedwith a given organisation. This matter is, of course, verydifferent in democratic and in totalitarian States, for in the latterall the organisations concerned, with very few exceptions, aredepartments of the State. As far as possible, however, I wish toignore this difference in a preliminary survey.Organisations, both public and private, affect an individual intwo ways. There are those that are designed to facilitate therealisation of his own wishes, or of what are considered to be hisinterests; and there are those intended to prevent him fromthwarting the legitimate interests of others. The distinction isnot clear-cut: the police exist to further the interests of honestmen, as well as to thwart burglars, but their impact on the livesof burglars is much more emphatic than their contacts withthose who abide by the law. I shall return to this distinctionpresently; for the moment, let us consider the most importantpoints, in the lives of individuals in civilised communities, atwhich some organisation plays some decisive part.To begin with birth: the services of a doctor and/or a midwifeare considered essential, and although, formerly, a whollyuntrained Mrs Gamp was thought sufficient, a certain level ofskill, determined by a public authority, is now exacted.Throughout infancy and childhood health is to some extent theconcern of the State; the extent of the State’s concern in variouscountries is fairly accurately reflected in the infant and juveniledeath-rates. If the parents fail too egregiously in their parentalduty, the child can be taken from them by the public authority,and assigned to the care of foster-parents or of an institution. Atthe age of five or six, the child comes under the educationauthorities, and thenceforward, for a number of years, is compelledto learn those things that the government thinks everycitizen should know. At the end of this process, in the majorityof cases, most opinions and mental habits are fixed for life.Meanwhile, in democratic countries, the child comes underother influences which are not exerted by the State. If the parentsare religious or political, they will teach the tenets of a creed or aparty. As the child grows older, he becomes increasingly interestedin organised amusements, such as cinemas and football166 organisations and the individualmatches. If he is rather intelligent, but not very, he may beinfluenced by the Press. If he goes to a school which is not a Stateschool, he acquires an outlook which is in certain ways peculiarem;in England, usually an outlook of social superiority to the herd.Meanwhile he imbibes a moral code which is that of his age andclass and nation. The moral code is important, but not easy todefine, because precepts are of three not sharply differentiatedsorts: first, those which must be really obeyed on pain of generalobloquy; secondly, those which must not be openly disobeyed;and thirdly, those which are regarded as counsels of perfection,only to be obeyed by saints. Moral codes applicable to the wholepopulation are mainly, though by no means wholly, the result ofreligious tradition, operating through religious organisations,but capable of surviving their decay for a longer or shorter time.There are also professional codes: things which must not bedone by an officer, or a doctor, or a barrister, and so on. Suchcodes, in modern times, are usually formulated by professionalassociations. They are very imperative: while the Church and theArmy conflicted as to duelling, the Army code prevailed amongofficers; medical and confessional secrecy prevails even againstthe law.As soon as a young man or woman begins to earn money,various organisations begin to influence his or her activities. Theemployer is usually an organisation; and there is probably, inaddition, a federation of employers. The trade union and theState both control important aspects of the work; and apart fromsuch matters as insurance and Factory Acts, the State can help todecide, by tariffs and by government orders, whether the particulartrade that a man has chosen shall prosper or be depressed.The prosperity of an industry may be affected by all kinds ofcircumstances, such as currency, the international situation, orthe ambitions of Japan.Marriage and duties to children again bring a man into relationswith the law, and also with a moral code mainly derivedorganisations and the individual 167from the Church. If he lives long enough and is sufficiently poor,he may at last enjoy an old age pension; and his death is carefullysupervised by the law and the medical profession, to make surethat it has not occurred by his own wish or by anyone else’s.Certain matters remain to be decided by personal initiative. Aman can marry to please himself, provided the lady is willing; heprobably has a certain liberty of choice, in youth, as to his meansof livelihood; his leisure can be spent as he chooses, within thelimits of what he can afford; if he is interested in religion orpolitics, he can join whatever sect or party most attracts him.Except in the matter of marriage, he is still dependent uponorganisations even when he has freedom of choice: he cannot,unless he is a very exceptional man, found a religion, createa party, organise a football club, or make his own drinks. Whathe can do is to choose among ready-made alternatives; butcompetition tends to make all these alternatives as attractive aspossible, within what economic conditions permit.So far, the effect of the organisations characteristic of civilisedsocieties is to increase a man’s liberty as compared with (say) apeasant in a comparatively undeveloped community. Considerthe life of a Chinese peasant, as compared with that of an Occidentalwage-earner. As a child, it is true, he does not have to goto school, but from a very early age he has to work. He is morelikely than not to die in early childhood, from hardship and lackof medical care. If he survives, he has no choice as to his meansof livelihood, unless he is prepared to become a soldier or abandit, or to run the risk of migrating to some large town.Custom deprives him of all but a minimum of freedom as tomarriage. Of leisure he has practically none, and if he had itthere would be nothing very pleasant to do with it. He livesalways on the margin of subsistence, and in times of famine alarge part of his family is likely to die of hunger. And hard as lifeis for the man, it is far harder for the wife and daughters. Eventhe most depressed of the unemployed, in England, have a life168 organisations and the individualwhich is almost a paradise in comparison with that of theaverage Chinese peasant.To come to another class of organisations, those designed toprevent a man from doing injury to others: the most importantof these are the police and the criminal law. In so far as theseinterfere with crimes of violence, such as murder, robbery, andassault, they increase the freedom and happiness of all but asmall minority of exceptionally ferocious individuals. Where thepolice are not in control, gangs of marauders quickly establish areign of terror, which makes most of the pleasures of civilisedlife impossible for all except the gangsters. There is, of course, adanger: it is possible for the police themselves to become gangsters,or at any rate to establish some form of tyranny. Thisdanger is by no means imaginary, but the methods of copingwith it are well known. There is also the danger that the policemay be used by the holders of power to prevent or obstructmovements in favour of desirable reforms. That this shouldhappen to some extent, seems almost inevitable. It is a part of thefundamental difficulty that the measures which are necessary toprevent anarchy are such as make it more difficult to change thestatus quo when it ought to be changed. In spite of this difficulty,few members of civilised communities would think it possibleto dispense wholly with the police.So far, we have taken no account of war and revolution orthe fear of them. These involve the State’s instinct of selfpreservation,and lead to the most drastic forms of control overindividual lives. In almost all Continental countries, there isuniversal compulsory military service. Everywhere, when warbreaks out, every male of military age can be called upon tofight, and every adult can be ordered to do the work that thegovernment thinks most conducive to victory. Those whoseactivities are thought helpful to the enemy are liable to the deathpenalty. In time of peace, all governments take steps—somemore drastically, others less so—to insure willingness to fightorganisations and the individual 169when the moment comes, and loyalty to the national cause at alltimes. Government action in the matter of revolution variesaccording to the degree of likelihood of it. Other things beingequal, the risk of revolution will be greater where governmentcares little for the welfare of the citizens. But where as in totalitarianStates, the government has a monopoly, not only of physicalcoercion, but of moral and economic persuasion, it can gofurther in disregard of citizens than is possible for a less intensivegovernment, since revolutionary sentiment is less easy topropagate and to organise. It is therefore to be expected that, inso far as the State is distinct from the body of the citizens, everyincrease in its power will make it more indifferent to theirwelfare.From the above brief survey it seems to result that, in themain, the effects of organisations, apart from those resultingfrom governmental self-preservation, are such as to increaseindividual happiness and well-being. Education, health, productivityof labour, provision against destitution, are matters as towhich, in principle, there should be no dispute; and all of themdepend upon a very high degree of organisation. But when wecome to measures intended to prevent revolution or defeat inwar, the matter is different. However necessary such measuresmay be deemed to be, their effects are unpleasant, and they canonly be defended on the ground that revolution or defeat wouldbe still more unpleasant. The difference is perhaps only one ofdegree. It may be said that vaccination, education, and roadmakingare unpleasant, but less so than smallpox, ignorance, andimpassable morasses. The difference of degree is, however, sogreat as to amount almost to a difference in kind. Moreover, theunpleasantness of the measures involved in peaceful progressneed not be more than temporary. Smallpox could be stampedout, and vaccination would then become unnecessary. Educationand road-making could both be made fairly agreeable by theemployment of enlightened methods. But every technical170 organisations and the individualadvance makes war more painful and more destructive, and theprevention of revolution by totalitarian methods more disastrousto humanity and intelligence.There is another way of classifying the relations of anindividual to different organisations: he may be a customer, avoluntary member, an involuntary member, or an enemy.The organisations of which man is a customer must bethought by him to minister to his comforts, but they do not addmuch to his feeling of power. He may, of course, be mistaken inhis good opinion of their services: the pills he buys may beuseless, the beer may be bad, the race-meeting an occasion forlosing money to bookmakers. Nevertheless, even in such cases,he gains something from the organisations that he patronises:hope, amusement, and the sense of personal initiative. The prospectof buying a new car gives a man something to think and talkabout. On the whole, freedom of choice as to how to spendmoney is a source of pleasure—affection for one’s own furniture,for example, is a very strong and very widespread emotion,which would not exist if the State supplied us with furnishedapartments.The organisations of which man is a voluntary memberinclude political parties, Churches, clubs, friendly societies,enterprises in which he has invested money, and so on. Many ofthese are faced by enemy organisations belonging to the samecategories: rival political parties, dissident Churches, competingbusiness enterprises, and so on. The resulting contests give tothose who are interested in them a sense of drama as well as anoutlet for power impulses. Except where the State is weak, suchcontests are kept within bounds by the law, which punishesviolence or gross fraud unless it is a secret accomplice. The battlesbetween opposing organisations, when compelled by theauthorities to be bloodless, afford, on the whole, a useful outletfor the feelings of pugnacity and love of power which are likely,otherwise, to seek more sinister forms of satisfaction. There isorganisations and the individual 171always the danger, if the State is lax or not impartial, that politicalcontests may degenerate into riot, murder, and civil war. But ifthis danger is averted they are a wholesome element in the life ofindividuals and communities.The most important organisation of which a man is aninvoluntary member is the State. The principle of nationality, sofar as it has prevailed, has, however, led to membership of a Statebeing usually in accordance with the will of the citizen, thoughnot due to his will.He might have been a Russian,A Frenchman, Turk, or Prussian,Or perhaps Italian,But in spite of all temptationsTo belong to other nations,He remains an Englishman.Most people, given the chance to change their State, wouldnot choose to do so, except when the State represents an aliennationality. Nothing has done more to strengthen the State thanthe success of the principle of nationality. Where patriotism andcitizenship go hand in hand, a man’s loyalty to his State usuallyexceeds his loyalty to voluntary organisations such as Churchesand parties.Loyalty to the State has both positive and negative motives.There is an element which is connected with love of home andfamily. But this would not take the forms which are taken byloyalty to the State, if it were not reinforced by the twin motivesof love of power and fear of foreign aggression. The contests ofStates, unlike those of political parties, are all-in contests. Thewhole civilised world was shocked by the kidnapping and murderof the one Lindbergh baby, but such acts, on a vast scale, areto be the commonplaces of the next war, for which we are allpreparing, at the cost—in Great Britain—of more than a quarter172 organisations and the individualof our income. No other organisation rouses anything like theloyalty aroused by the national State. And the chief activity of theState is preparation for large-scale homicide. It is loyalty to thisorganisation for death that causes men to endure the totalitarianState, and to risk the destruction of home and children and ourwhole civilisation rather than submit to alien rule. Individualpsychology and governmental organisation have effected a tragicsynthesis, from which we and our children must suffer if wecontinue powerless to find an issue except through disaster.organisations and the individual 17314COMPETITIONThe nineteenth century, which was keenly aware of the dangersof arbitrary power, had a favourite device for avoidingthem, namely competition. The evils of monopoly were stillfamiliar from tradition. The Stuarts, and even Elizabeth, grantedprofitable monopolies to courtiers, the objection to which wasone of the causes of the Civil War. In feudal times, it wascommon for lords of the manor to insist upon grain beingground in their mills. Continental monarchies, before 1848,abounded in semi-feudal restrictions on freedom of competition.These restrictions were made, not in the interest of eitherproducers or consumers, but for the benefit of monarchs andlandowners. In eighteenth-century England, on the contrary,many restrictions survived which were inconvenient both tolandowners and to capitalists—for example, laws as to minimumwages, and prohibition of the enclosure of commonlands. In England, therefore, until the Corn Law question, landownersand capitalists, on the whole, agreed in advocatinglaissez-faire.All that was most vigorous in Europe was in favour, also, offree competition in matters of opinion. From 1815 to 1848,Church and State, over the whole of the Continent, were unitedin opposing the ideas of the French Revolution. The censorship,throughout Germany and Austria, was at once severe andridiculous. Heine made fun of it in a chapter consisting of thefollowing words:The German Censors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . idiots. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .In France and Italy, the Napoleonic legend, as well as admirationof the Revolution, was the object of governmental suppression.In Spain and the States of the Church, all liberal thought,even the mildest, was forbidden; the Pope’s government stillofficially believed in sorcery. The principle of nationality wasnot allowed to be advocated in Italy, Germany, or Austria-Hungary. And everywhere reaction was associated with oppositionto the interests of commerce, with maintenance of feudalrights as against the rural population, and with the support offoolish kings and an idle nobility. In these circumstances, laissezfairewas the natural expression of energies that were hampered intheir legitimate activities.The freedoms desired by Liberals were achieved in Americain the moment of winning independence; in England, in theperiod from 1824 to 1846; in France in 1871; in Germany bystages from 1848 to 1918; in Italy in the Risorgimento; and evenin Russia, for a moment, in the February Revolution. But theresult was not quite what Liberals had intended; in industry,it bore more resemblance to the hostile prophecies of Marx.America, with the longest Liberal tradition, was the first to enterthe state of trusts, i.e. of monopolies not granted by the State,like those of earlier times, but resulting from the naturalcompetition 175operation of competition. American liberalism was outraged,but impotent, and industrial development in other countriesgradually followed the lead given by Rockefeller. It was discoveredthat competition, unless artificially maintained, bringsabout its own extinction by leading to the complete victory ofsomeone among the competitors.This, however, is not true of all forms of competition. It istrue, broadly speaking, where increase in the size of an organisationmeans increase of efficiency. There remain, therefore, twoquestions: first, in what kinds of cases is competition technicallywasteful? Secondly, in what cases is it desirable on non-technicalgrounds?Technical considerations, broadly speaking, have led to anincrease in the optimum size of organisations suitable for dealingwith a given matter. In the seventeenth century, roads weredealt with by parishes; now, they are controlled by CountyCouncils largely financed and supervised nationally. Electricitycan be best utilised by an authority controlling a considerablearea, particularly where there is some important source ofpower, such as Niagara. Irrigation may demand a work like theAswan dam, of which the expense is prohibitive unless the areacontrolled is very large. The economies of large-scale productiondepend upon control of a market sufficient to absorb anenormous output. And so on.There are other directions in which the advantages of largeareas have not yet been fully utilised. Elementary educationmight be enlivened and improved by government educationalfilms and by lessons broadcast from the . It would be stillbetter if such films and lessons could be prepared by an internationalauthority, though at present this is a utopian dream.Civil aviation is crippled by not being international. It is obviousthat, for most purposes, large States are better than small ones,and that no State can adequately fulfil the primary purpose ofprotecting the lives of its citizens unless it is world-wide.176 competitionThere are, however, certain advantages in small areas. Theyinvolve less red tape, quicker decisions, and more possibility ofadaptation to local needs and customs. The obvious solution is alocal government which is not sovereign, but has certain definedpowers, and is controlled, on large issues, by the central authority,which should also give financial assistance whenever there issufficient reason for doing so. This subject, however, would takeus into questions of detail which I do not wish to discuss.The question of competition is more difficult. It has beenmuch debated in the economic sphere, but its importance is atleast as great in regard to armed force and propaganda. While theLiberal view was that there should be free competition in businessand propaganda, but not in armed force, Italian Fascists andGerman Nazis have proclaimed the diametrically opposite opinion,that competition is always bad except where it takes theform of national war, in which case it is the noblest of humanactivities. Marxists decry competition except in the form of thestruggle for power between antagonistic classes. Plato, so far asI remember, admires only one kind of competition, namelyemulation for honour among comrades in arms, which, he says,is promoted by homosexual love.In the sphere of production, competition between a multitudeof small firms, which characterised the early phase of industrialism,has given place, in the most important branches of production,to competition between trusts each coextensive with atleast one State. There is only one important international trust,namely the armament industry, which is exceptional in thatorders to one firm are a cause of orders to another: if one countryarms, so do others, and therefore the usual motives for competitiondo not exist. Apart from this peculiar case, competitionin business still exists, but it is now merged in the competitionbetween nations, in which war is the ultimate arbiter of success.The good or evil of modern business competition, therefore, isthe same as that of rivalry between States.competition 177There is, however, another form of economic competitionwhich is as fierce as it ever was, I mean the competition for jobs.This begins with scholarship examinations at school, and continuesthroughout most men’s working lives. This form of competitioncan be mitigated, but cannot be wholly abolished. Evenif all actors received the same salary, a man would rather act thepart of Hamlet than that of the First Sailor. There are two conditionsto be observed: first that the unsuccessful should sufferno avoidable hardship; secondly, that success should, as far aspossible, be the reward of some genuine merit, and not of sycophancyor cunning. The second condition has received much lessattention from Socialists than it deserves. I shall not, however,pursue this subject, as it would take us too far from our theme.The most important form of competition, at the presentday, is between States, especially those that are called GreatPowers. This has become a totalitarian competition, for power,for wealth, for control over men’s beliefs, but above all for lifeitself, since the infliction of the death penalty is the principalmeans to victory. It is obvious that the only way of ending thiscompetition is the abolition of national sovereignty and nationalarmed forces, and the substitution of a single international governmentwith a monopoly of armed force. The alternative to thismeasure is the death of a large percentage of the population ofcivilised countries, and the reduction of the remainder to destitutionand semi-barbarism. At present, a vast majority prefer thisalternative.Competition in propaganda, which Liberals, in theory, wouldleave free, has become connected with the competition betweenarmed States. If you preach Fascism, your most important effectis to strengthen Germany and Italy; if you preach Communism,you are not likely to bring it about, but you may help Russia towin the next war; if you urge the importance of democracy, youwill find yourself lending support to the policy of a militaryalliance with France for the defence of Czechoslovakia. That178 competitionRussia, Italy, and Germany should have successively abandonedthe principle of freedom in propaganda, is not surprising, for theprevious adoption of this principle enabled the present governmentsof those countries to overthrow their predecessors, and itscontinuance would have made the carrying out of their ownpolicy totally impossible. The world at present is so differentfrom that of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that theLiberal arguments for free competition in propaganda, in so faras they remain valid, need to be carefully re-stated in modernterms. I believe that they retain a large measure of validity, butthat they are subject to limitations which it is important torealise.The doctrine of Liberals, for example of John Stuart Mill inhis book On Liberty, was far less extreme than is often supposed.Men were to be free in so far as their actions did not injureothers, but when others were involved they might, if expedient,be restrained by the action of the State. A man might, say, havebeen conscientiously convinced that Queen Victoria ought to beassassinated, but Mill would not have allowed him freedom topropagate this opinion. This is an extreme case, but in factalmost any opinion worth either advocating or combating is sureto affect someone adversely. The right of free speech is nugatoryunless it includes the right to say things that may have unpleasantconsequences to certain individuals or classes. If, therefore, thereis to be any scope for freedom in propaganda, it will need for itsjustification some stronger principle than Mill’s.We may look at this question from the point of view of thegovernment, from that of the average citizen, from that of theardent innovator, or from that of the philosopher. Let us beginwith the point of view of the government.Governments, as we have already remarked, are threatenedby two dangers: revolution, and defeat in war. (In a parliamentarycountry, the official opposition is to be reckoned aspart of the government.) These dangers rouse the instinct ofcompetition 179self-preservation, and it is to be expected that governments willdo what they can to avert them. From this point of view, thequestion is: how much freedom of propaganda will produce thegreatest degree of stability, both against internal and againstexternal dangers? The answer depends, of course, upon thecharacter of the government and the circumstances of the time.If the government is itself recent and revolutionary, and thepopulation has strong reasons for discontent, freedom is almostsure to bring further revolution. These circumstances existed inFrance in 1793, in Russia in 1918, and in Germany in 1933, andaccordingly in all three cases freedom of propaganda was destroyedby the government. But when the government is traditional,and the economic circumstances of the population arenot too desperate, freedom acts as a safety valve and tends todiminish discontent. Although the British Government has donea good deal to hinder Communist propaganda, that is not thereason for the failure of Communists in Great Britain, and itwould have been wise, even from a governmental point of view,to have allowed absolute freedom to their propaganda.I do not think that a government should ever allow a propagandaurging, say, the assassination of some particular person.For in this case the action recommended may take place even ifvery few men are converted by the propaganda. It is the duty ofthe State to protect its citizens’ lives unless they have legallyincurred the death penalty, and if there is an agitation in favour ofsomeone’s assassination it may become very difficult to protecthim. The Weimar Republic was too lax in this respect. But I donot think that a stable government ought to prohibit an agitationin favour of making some class of persons legally liable to the deathpenalty, for such an agitation would involve no threat to legality.There can be no good reason, even from a governmental pointof view, for interference with opinions which do not involvedanger to the existence of the State. If a man holds that the earthis flat, or that the Sabbath should be observed on Saturday, he180 competitionshould be free to do his best to convert people to his way ofthinking. The State should not regard itself as the guardian of theTruth in science, metaphysics, or morals. It has done so at mosttimes, and does so at present in Germany, Italy, and Russia. Butthis is a confession of weakness, from which stable States shouldbe exempt.Coming now to the average citizen one finds that he takesvery little interest in freedom of propaganda except in thesecircumstances in which it seems to government most dangerous,namely, when it threatens the existence of governments. Thegovernment may differ from its subjects in religion or nationality;it may represent the king as against the nobles, the nobles asagainst the bourgeoisie, or the bourgeoisie as against the poor; itmay seem lacking in patriotism, like Charles II and the Germangovernments after the war. In such situations, the average citizenmay become interested in an agitation against the government,and will invoke the principle of free speech which his championsare imprisoned. But these are pre-revolutionary situations,and to say that, where they exist, governments should tolerateadverse propaganda, is to say, in effect, that they ought to abdicate.This is often true even from their point of view since byabdicating they lose only their power, whereas if they persistthey probably ultimately lose their lives. But few governmentshave had the wisdom to see this. Nor is it always true when astrong country oppresses a weak one.She’s the most distressful countryThat ever yet was seen,For they’re hanging men and women thereFor wearing o’ the green.England was able to pursue this policy towards Irelandfor eight centuries, with, in the end, only some loss of moneyand a considerable loss of prestige. During the eight centuriescompetition 181British policy was successful, since landowners were rich whilepeasants starved.Freedom of propaganda, in the cases in which it intereststhe ordinary citizen, involves either violent revolution or therecognition of a further freedom, namely that of choosing thegovernment. It is bound up with democracy and the right ofdiscontented communities to autonomy; in a word, with theright to achieve peacefully what would otherwise be achieved byrevolution. This is an important right, and its recognition is verynecessary for the peace of the world; but it goes far beyond theright of free propaganda.It remains to consider the standpoint of the ardent innovator.We may take as typical the Christian before Constantine, theProtestant in the time of Luther, and the Communist at the presentday. Such men have seldom been believers in free speech.They have been willing themselves to suffer martyrdom, but havebeen equally willing to inflict it. History shows that, in the past,determined men could speak freely in spite of governments.Modern governments, however, are more efficient, and will perhapssucceed in making fundamental innovation impossible. Onthe other hand, war may cause revolution and even anarchy,leading, perhaps, to some quite new beginning. On this groundsome Communists look forward with hope to the next war.The ardent innovator is, as a rule, a millenarian: he holds thatthe millennium will have arrived when all men embrace hiscreed. Though in the present he is revolutionary, in the future heis a conservative: a perfect State is to be reached, and whenreached is only to be preserved unchanged. Holding these views,he naturally shrinks from no degree of violence either in seekingthe perfect State or in preventing its overthrow: in opposition heis a terrorist; in government, a persecutor. His belief in violencenaturally provokes the same belief in his opponents: while theyare in power they will persecute him, and when they are inopposition they will plot his assassination. His millennium is not182 competitiontherefore altogether pleasant for everybody; there will be spies,arrests by administrative orders, and concentration camps. But,like Tertullian, he sees no harm in that.There are, it is true, millenarians of a gentler type. There arethose who consider that what is best in a man must come fromwithin, and cannot be imposed by any external authority; thisview is exemplified by the Society of Friends. There are thosewho hold that external influences may be important and beneficialwhen they take the form of benevolence and wise persuasion,but not when they take the form of prison or execution.Such men may believe in freedom of propaganda in spite ofbeing ardent innovators.There is another kind of innovator, who has only existed sinceevolution became fashionable; of this kind Sorel in his syndicalistdays may be taken as typical. Such men hold that human lifeshould be a continual progress, not towards a definable goal, notin any sense that can be stated precisely before the progress hasbeen made, but of such a sort that each step, when achieved, isseen to have been an advance. It is better to see than not to see, tohave speech than to be without it, and so on; but while allanimals were still blind, it was not possible for them to proposethe acquisition of sight as the next step in reform. Nevertheless,the fact that it was the next step proves, retrospectively, that astatic conservatism would have been a mistake. All innovations,therefore—so it is argued—must be encouraged, since oneamong them, though we cannot know which, will prove toembody the spirit of evolution.No doubt there is an element of truth in this view, but it is onethat easily develops into a shallow mysticism of progress, andowing to its vagueness it cannot be made a basis for practicalpolitics. The historically important innovators have believedin taking the kingdom of heaven by storm; they have oftenachieved their kingdom, but it has proved to be not the kingdomof heaven.competition 183I come now to the standpoint of the philosopher as regardsfreedom of propaganda. Gibbon, describing the tolerant spirit ofantiquity, says: ‘The various modes of worship, which prevailedin the Roman world, were all considered by the people, asequally true; by the philosopher, as equally false; and by themagistrate, as equally useful.’ The philosopher whom I have inmind will not go so far as to say that all prevalent creeds areequally false, but he will not allow that any is free from falsehood,or that, if by chance it were, this fortunate fact could be discoveredby the faculties of the human mind. To the unphilosophicalpropagandist, there is his own propaganda, which isthat of truth, and the opposite propaganda, which is that offalsehood. If he believes in permitting both, it is only because hefears that his might be the one to suffer prohibition. To thephilosophical spectator, the matter is not so simple.What, to the philosopher, can be the uses of propaganda?He cannot say, like the propagandist: ‘Pin-factories exist to manufacturepins, and opinion-factories to manufacture opinions.If the opinions manufactured are as like as two pins, what ofthat, provided they are good opinions? And if the large-scaleproduction rendered possible by monopoly is cheaper thancompeting small-scale production, there is the same reason formonopoly in the one case as in the other. Nay, more: a competingopinion-factory does not usually, like a competing pinfactory,manufacture other opinions which may be just as good:it manufactures opinions designed to damage those of my factory,and therefore immensely increases the work required tokeep people supplied with my produce. Competing factories,therefore, must be forbidden.’ This, I say, the philosopher cannotadopt as his view. He must contend that any useful purposewhich is to be served by propaganda must be not that of causingan almost certainly erroneous opinion to be dogmaticallybelieved, but, on the contrary, that of promoting judgement,rational doubt, and the power of weighing opposing consider-184 competitionations; and this purpose it can only serve if there is competitionamong propagandas. He will compare the public to a judge wholistens to counsel on either side, and will hold that a monopolyin propaganda is as absurd as if, in a criminal trial, only theprosecution or only the defence were allowed to be heard. So farfrom desiring uniformity of propaganda, he will advocate that,as far as possible, everybody should hear all sides of every question.Instead of different newspapers, each devoted to the interestsof one party and encouraging the dogmatism of its readers,he will advocate a single newspaper, in which all parties arerepresented.Freedom of debate, of which the intellectual advantages areobvious, does not necessarily involve competing organisations.The  allows controversy. Rival scientific theories can all berepresented within the Royal Society. Learned bodies, in general,do not indulge in corporate propaganda, but give opportunitiesto their members severally to advocate each his own theory.Such discussion, within a single organisation pre-supposes afundamental agreement; no Egyptologist wishes to invoke themilitary to crush a rival Egyptologist whose theories he dislikes.When a community is in fundamental agreement as to itsform of government, free discussion is possible, but wheresuch agreement does not exist, propaganda is felt to be a preludeto the use of force, and those who possess force will naturallyaim at a monopoly of propaganda. Freedom of propaganda ispossible when the differences are not such as to make peaceablecooperation under one government impossible. Protestants andCatholics could not cooperate politically in the sixteenth century,but in the eighteenth and nineteenth they could; hencein the interval religious toleration became possible. A stablegovernmental framework is essential to intellectual freedom; butunfortunately it may also be the chief engine of tyranny. Thesolution of this difficulty depends very largely upon the form ofgovernment.competition 18515POWER AND MORAL CODESMorality, at any rate since the days of the Hebrew prophets, hashad two divergent aspects. On the one hand, it has been a socialinstitution analogous to law; on the other hand, it has been amatter for the individual conscience. In the former aspect, it ispart of the apparatus of power; in the latter, it is often revolutionary.The kind which is analogous to law is called ‘positive’ morality;the other kind may be called ‘personal’. I wish in thischapter to consider the relations of these two kinds of moralityto each other and to power.Positive morality is older than personal morality, and probablyolder than law and government. It consists originally oftribal customs, out of which law gradually develops. Considerthe extraordinarily elaborate rules as to who may marry whom,which are found among very primitive savages. To us, theseseem merely rules, but presumably to those who accept themthey have the same moral compulsive force as we feel in ourrules against incestuous unions. Their source is obscure, but isno doubt in some sense religious. This part of positive moralityappears to have no relation to social inequalities; it neither confersexceptional power nor assumes its existence. There are stillmoral rules of this sort among civilised people. The GreekChurch prohibits the marriage of godparents of the same child, aprohibition which fulfils no social purpose, either good or bad,but has its source solely in theology. It seems probable that manyprohibitions which are now accepted on rational grounds wereoriginally superstitious. Murder was objectionable because ofthe hostility of the ghost, which was not directed only againstthe murderer, but against his community. The community thereforehad an interest in the matter, which they could deal witheither by punishment or by ceremonies of purification. Graduallypurification came to have a spiritual signification, and to beidentified with repentance and absolution; but its original ceremonialcharacter is still recalled by such phrases as ‘washed inthe blood of the Lamb’.This aspect of positive morality, important as it is, is not theone with which I wish to deal. I wish to consider those aspectsof accepted ethical codes in which they minister to power. Oneof the purposes—usually in large part unconscious—of a traditionalmorality is to make the existing social system work. Itachieves this purpose, when it is successful, both more cheaplyand more effectively than a police force does. But it is liable to beconfronted with a revolutionary morality, inspired by the desirefor a redistribution of power. I want, in this chapter, to consider,first, the effect of power on moral codes, and then the questionwhether some other basis can be found for morality.The most obvious example of power-morality is the inculcationof obedience. It is (or rather was) the duty of children tosubmit to parents, wives to husbands, servants to masters, subjectsto princes, and (in religious matters) laymen to priests;there were also more specialised duties of obedience in armiesand religious orders. Each of these duties has a long history,running parallel with that of the institution concerned.power and moral codes 187Let us begin with filial piety. There are savages at the presentday who, when their parents grow too old for work, sell them tobe eaten. At some stage in the development of civilisation,it must have occurred to some man of unusual forethoughtthat he could, while his children were still young, produce inthem a state of mind which would lead them to keep him alivein old age; presumably he was a man whose own parents werealready disposed of. In creating a party to support his subversiveopinion, I doubt whether he appealed merely to motives ofprudence; I suspect that he invoked the Rights of Man, theadvantages of a mainly frugiferous diet, and the moral blamelessnessof the old who have worn themselves out labouring fortheir children. Probably there was at the moment some emaciatedbut unusually wise elder, whose advice was felt to be morevaluable than his flesh. However this may be, it came to be feltthat one’s parents should be honoured rather than eaten. To us,the respect for fathers in early civilisations seems excessive, butwe have to remember that a very powerful deterent was neededto put an end to the lucrative practice of having them eaten. Andso we find the Ten Commandments suggesting that if you fail tohonour your father and mother you will die young, the Romansconsidering patricide the most atrocious of crimes, and Confuciusmaking filial piety the very basis of morality. All this is adevice, however instinctive and unconscious, for prolongingparental power beyond the early years when children are helpless.The authority of parents has of course been reinforced bytheir possession of property, but if filial piety had not existedyoung men would not have allowed their fathers to retain controlof their flocks and herds after they had become feeble.The same sort of thing happened in regard to the subjectionof women. The superior strength of male animals does not, inmost cases, lead to a continual subjection of the females, becausethe males have not a sufficient constancy of purpose. Amonghuman beings, the subjection of women is much more complete188 power and moral codesat a certain level of civilisation than it is among savages. And thesubjection is always reinforced by morality. A man, says St Paul,‘is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory ofthe man. For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of theman. Neither was the man created for the woman; but thewoman for the man’ (I Corinthians xi, 7–9). It follows thatwives ought to obey their husbands, and that unfaithfulness is aworse sin in a wife than in a husband. Christianity, it is true,holds, in theory, that adultery is equally sinful in either sex,since it is a sin against God. But this view has not prevailed inpractice, and was not held even theoretically in pre-Christiantimes. Adultery with a married woman was wicked, becauseit was an offence against her husband; but female slaves andwar-captives were the legitimate property of their master, andno blame attached to intercourse with them. This view was heldby pious Christian slave-owners, though not by their wives, evenin nineteenth-century America.The basis of the difference between morality for men andmorality for women was obviously the superior power of men.Originally the superiority was only physical, but from this basisit gradually extended to economics, politics, and religion. Thegreat advantage of morality over the police appears very clearlyin this case, for women, until quite recently, genuinely believedthe moral precepts which embodied male domination, andtherefore required much less compulsion than would otherwisehave been necessary.The code of Hammurabi gives an interesting illustration of theunimportance of women in the eyes of the legislator. If a manstrikes the daughter of a gentleman when she is pregnant, andshe dies in consequence, it is decreed that the daughter of thestriker shall be put to death. As between the gentleman and thestriker, this is just; the daughter who is executed is merely apossession of the latter, and has no claim to life on her ownaccount. And in killing the gentleman’s daughter the striker ispower and moral codes 189guilty of an offence, not against her, but against the gentleman.The daughters had no rights because they had no power.Kings, until George I, were objects of religious veneration.There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,That treason can but peep the thing it would,Acts little of his will.The word ‘treason’, even in republics, has still a flavour ofimpiety. In England, government profits much by the traditionof royalty. Victorian statesmen, even Mr Gladstone, felt it theirduty to the Queen to see to it that she was never left withouta Prime Minister. The duty of obedience to authority is still feltby many as a duty towards the sovereign. This is a decayingsentiment, but as it decays government becomes less stable, anddictatorships of the Right or the Left become more possible.Bagehot’s English Constitution—a book still well worth reading—begins the discussion of the monarchy as follows:The use of the Queen, in a dignified capacity, is incalculable.Without her in England, the present English Governmentwould fail and pass away. Most people when they read that theQueen walked on the slopes at Windsor—that the Prince ofWales went to the Derby—have imagined that too muchthought and prominence were given to little things. But theyhave been in error; and it is nice to trace how the actions of aretired widow and an unemployed youth became of suchimportance.The best reason why Monarchy is a strong government is,that it is an intelligible government. The mass of mankindunderstand it, and they hardly anywhere in the world understandany other. It is often said that men are ruled by theirimaginations; but it would be truer to say that they are governedby the weakness of their imaginations.190 power and moral codesThis is both true and important. Monarchy makes social cohesioneasy, first, because it is not so difficult to feel loyalty to anindividual as to an abstraction, and secondly, because kingship,in its long history, has accumulated sentiments of venerationwhich no new institution can inspire. Where hereditary monarchyhas been abolished it has usually been succeeded, after alonger or short time, by some other form of one-man rule:tyranny in Greece, the Empire in Rome, Cromwell in England,the Napoleons in France, Stalin and Hitler in our own day. Suchmen inherit a part of the feelings formerly attached to royalty. Itis amusing to note, in the confessions of the accused in Russiantrials, the acceptance of a morality of submission to the rulersuch as would be appropriate in the most ancient and traditionalof absolute monarchies. But a new dictator, unless he is a veryextraordinary man, can hardly inspire quite the same religiousveneration as hereditary monarchs enjoyed in the past.In the case of kingship, the religious element, as we haveseen, has often been carried so far as to interfere with power.Even then, however, it has helped to give stability to the socialsystem of which the king is a symbol. This has happened inmany semi-civilised countries, in Japan, and in England. InEngland, the doctrine that the king can do no wrong has beenused as a weapon for depriving him of power, but it has enabledhis Ministers to have more power than they would have if he didnot exist. Wherever there is a traditional monarchy, rebellionagainst the government is an offence against the king, and isregarded by the orthodox as a sin and an impiety. Kingship actstherefore, broadly speaking, as a force on the side of the statusquo, whatever that may be. Its most useful function, historically,has been the creation of a widely diffused sentiment favourableto social cohesion. Men are so little gregarious by nature thatanarchy is a constant danger, which kingship has done much toprevent. Against this merit, however, must be set the demerit ofperpetuating ancient evils and increasing the forces opposed topower and moral codes 191desirable change. This demerit has, in modern times, causedmonarchy to disappear over the greater part of the earth’ssurface.The power of priests is more obviously connected withmorals than any other form of power. In Christian countries,virtue consists in obedience to the will of God, and it is priestswho know what the will of God commands. The precept thatwe ought to obey God rather than man is, as we saw, capableof being revolutionary; it is so in two sets of circumstances,one, when the State is in opposition to the Church, the other,when it is held that God speaks directly to each individual conscience.The former state of affairs existed before Constantine,the latter among the Anabaptists and Independents. But innon-revolutionary periods, when there is an established andtraditional Church, it is accepted by positive morality as theintermediary between God and the individual conscience. Solong as this acceptance continues, its power is very great, andrebellion against the Church is thought more wicked than anyother kind. The Church has its difficulties nonetheless, for if ituses its power too flagrantly men begin to doubt whether it isinterpreting the will of God correctly; and when this doubtbecomes common, the whole ecclesiastical edifice crumbles, asit did in Teutonic countries at the Reformation.In the case of the Church, the relation between power andmorals is, to some extent, the opposite of what it is in the caseswe have hitherto considered. Positive morality enjoins submissionto parents, husbands, and kings, because they are powerful;but the Church is powerful because of its moral authority. This,however, is only true up to a point. Where the Church is secure,a morality of submission to the Church grows up, just as amorality of submission to parents, husbands, and kings hasgrown up. And a revolutionary rejection of this morality of submissionalso grows up in the same way. Heresy and schism arespecially abhorrent to the Church, and are therefore essential192 power and moral codeselements in revolutionary programmes. There are, however,more complicated results of opposition to priestly power. TheChurch being the official guardian of the moral code, itsopponents are likely to revolt in morals as well as in doctrine andgovernment. They may revolt, like the Puritans, into greaterstrictness, or, like the French Revolutionaries, into greater laxity;but in either case morals come to be a private matter, not, asbefore, the subject of official decisions by a public body.It must not be supposed that personal morality is in generalworse than official priestly morality, even when it is less severe.There is some evidence that when, in the sixth century ..,Greek sentiment was becoming strongly averse from humansacrifice, the oracle at Delphi tried to retard this humanitarianreform, and to keep alive the old rigid practices. Similarly in ourown day, when the State and public opinion consider it permissibleto marry one’s deceased wife’s sister, the Church, in so faras it has power, maintains the old prohibition.Morality, where the Church has lost power, has not becomegenuinely personal except for a few exceptional people. For themajority, it is represented by public opinion, both that of neighboursin general, and that of powerful groups such as employers.From the point of view of the sinner, the change may be slight,and may also be for the worse. Where the individual gains is notas sinner, but as judge: he becomes part of an informal democratictribunal, whereas, where the Church is strong, he mustaccept the rulings of Authority. The Protestant whose moralfeelings are strong usurps the ethical functions of the priest, andacquires a quasi-governmental attitude towards other people’svirtues and vices, especially the latter:Ye’ve naught to do but mark and tellYour neighbours’ faults and folly.This is not anarchy; it is democracy.power and moral codes 193The thesis that the moral code is an expression of power is,as we have seen, not wholly true. From the exogamous rulesof savages onward, there are, at all stages of civilisation, ethicalprinciples which have no visible relation to power—amongourselves; the condemnation of homosexuality may serve as anexample. The Marxist thesis, that the moral code is an expressionof economic power, is even less adequate than the thesisthat it is an expression of power in general. Nevertheless, theMarxist thesis is true in a very great many instances. Forexample: in the Middle Ages, when the most powerful of thelaity were landowners, when bishoprics and monastic ordersderived their income from land, and when the only investorsof money were Jews, the Church unhesitatingly condemned‘usury’, i.e. all lending of money at interest. This was a debtor’smorality. With the rise of the rich merchant class, itbecame impossible to maintain the old prohibition: it wasrelaxed first by Calvin, whose clientèle was mainly urban andprosperous, then by the other Protestants, and last of all by theCatholic Church.1 Creditor’s morality became the fashion, andnon-payment of debts a heinous sin. The Society of Friends,practically if not theoretically, excluded bankrupts until veryrecently.The moral code towards enemies is a matter as to whichdifferent ages have differed greatly, largely because the profitableuses of power have differed. On this subject, let us first hear theOld Testament.When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whitherthou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations beforethee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, andthe Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites and theJebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;1 On this subject, cf. R. H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism.194 power and moral codesAnd when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee;thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shaltmake no covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them:Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughtershalt thou not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thoutake unto thy son.For they will turn away thy son from following me, that theymay serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindledagainst you, and destroy thee suddenly.If they do all this, ‘there shall not be male or female barrenamong you, or among your cattle’.2As regards these seven nations, we are told in a later chaptereven more explicitly:‘Thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth . . . that they teachyou not to do after all their abominations’ (xx, 16 ,18).But towards ‘cities which are very far off from thee, andwhich are not of these nations’ it is permissible to be moremerciful:‘Thou shall smite every male thereof with the edge of thesword: but the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, andall that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou takeunto thyself ’ (ibid., 13–15).It will be remembered that when Saul smote the Amalekiteshe got into trouble for being insufficiently thorough:‘And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive and utterlydestroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.2 Deuteronomy, vii, 1–4 and 14.power and moral codes 195‘But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of thesheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, andall that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: buteverything that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.‘Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying,It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he isturned back from following me, and hath not performed mycommandments.’3It is obvious in these passages that the interests of the childrenof Israel were to prevail completely when they came into conflictwith those of the Gentiles, but that internally the interests ofreligion, i.e. of the priests, were to prevail over the economicinterests of the laity. The word of the Lord came unto Samuel,but it was the word of Samuel that came unto Saul, and the wordwas: ‘What meaneth then this bleating of sheep in mine ears,and the lowing of oxen which I hear?’ To which Saul could onlyreply by confessing his sin.The Jews, from their horror of idolatry—of which themicrobes apparently lurked even in sheep and cows—were led toexceptional thoroughness in the extermination of the vanquished.But no nation of antiquity recognised any legal ormoral limits to what might be done with defeated populations. Itwas customary to exterminate some and sell the rest into slavery.Some Greeks—for instance, Euripides in the Trojan Women—triedto create a sentiment against this practice, but without success.The vanquished, having no power, had no claim to mercy. Thisview was not abandoned, even in theory, until the coming ofChristianity.Duty to enemies is a difficult conception. Clemency was recognisedas a virtue in antiquity, but only when it was successful,that is to say, when it turned enemies into friends; otherwise, it3 I Samuel, xv, 8–11.196 power and moral codeswas condemned as a weakness. When fear had been aroused, noone expected magnanimity: the Romans showed none towardsHannibal or the followers of Spartacus. In the days of chivalry, aknight was expected to show courtesy to a knightly captive. Butthe conflicts of knights were not very serious; not the faintestmercy was shown to the Albigenses. In our day, almost equalferocity has been shown towards the victims of the white terrorsin Finland, Hungary, Germany, and Spain, and hardly any protestshave been aroused except among political opponents. Theterror in Russia, likewise, has been condoned by most of the Left.Now, as in the days of the Old Testament, no duty to enemies isacknowledged in practice when they are sufficiently formidableto arouse fear. Positive morality, in effect, is still only operativewithin the social group concerned, and is therefore still, ineffect, a department of government. Nothing short of a worldgovernment will cause people of pugnacious disposition toadmit, except as a counsel of perfection, that moral obligationsare not confined to a section of the human race.I have been concerned hitherto in this chapter with positivemorality, and, as has become evident, it is not enough. Broadlyspeaking, it is on the side of the powers that be, it does not allowa place for revolution, it does nothing to mitigate the fiercenessof strife, and it can find no place for the prophet who proclaimssome new moral insight. Certain difficult questions of theory areinvolved, but before considering them let us remind ourselvesof some of the things that only opposition to positive moralitycould achieve.The world owes something to the Gospels, though not somuch as it would if they had had more influence. It owes somethingto those who denounced slavery and the subjection ofwomen. We may hope that in time it will owe something tothose who denounce war and economic injustice. In the eighteenthand nineteenth centuries, it owed much to the apostles oftolerance; perhaps it will again in some happier age than ours.power and moral codes 197Revolutions against the mediaeval Church, the Renaissancemonarchies, and the present power of plutocracy, are necessaryfor the avoidance of stagnation. Admitting, as we must, thatmankind needs revolution and individual morality, the problemis to find a place for these things without plunging the worldinto anarchy.There are two questions to be considered: first, what is thewisest attitude for positive morality, from its own standpoint, totake to personal morality? Second, what degree of respect doespersonal morality owe to positive morality? But before discussingeither of these, something must be said as to what is meantby personal morality.Personal morality may be considered as a historical phenomenon,or from the standpoint of the philosopher. Let us beginwith the former.Almost every individual that has ever existed, so far as historyis aware, has had a profound horror of certain kinds of acts. As arule, these acts are held in abhorrence not only by one individual,but by a whole tribe or nation or sect or class. Sometimesthe origin of the abhorrence is unknown, sometimes it can betraced to a historical personage who was a mortal innovator. Weknow why Mohammedans will not make images of animals orhuman beings; it is because the Prophet forbade them to do so.We know why orthodox Jews will not eat hare; it is because theMosaic Law declares that the hare is unclean. Such prohibitions,when accepted, belong to positive morality; but in their origin,at any rate when their origin is known, they belonged to privatemorality.Morality, for us, however, has come to mean something morethan ritual precepts, whether positive or negative. In the formin which it is familiar to us it is not primitive, but appears tohave a number of independent sources—Chinese sages, IndianBuddhists, Hebrew prophets, and Greek philosophers. Thesemen, whose importance in history it is difficult to overestimate,198 power and moral codesall lived within a few centuries of each other, and all sharedcertain characteristics which marked them out from their predecessors.Lao-Tse and Chung-Tse deliver the doctrine of the Taoas what they know of their own knowledge, not through traditionor the wisdom of others; and the doctrine consists not ofspecific duties, but of a way of life, a manner of thinking andfeeling, from which it will become plain, without the need forrules, what must be done on each occasion. The same may besaid of the early Buddhists. The Hebrew prophets, at their best,transcend the Law, and advocate a new and more inward kindof virtue, recommended not by tradition, but by the words ‘thussaith the Lord’. Socrates acts as his daemon commands, not asthe legally constituted authorities desire; he is prepared to suffermartyrdom rather than be untrue to the inner voice. All thesemen were rebels in their day, and all have come to be honoured.Something of what was new in them has come to be taken as amatter of course. But it is not altogether easy to say what thissomething is.The minimum that must be accepted by any thoughtful personwho either adheres to a religion having a historical origin,or thinks that some such religion was an improvement on whatwent before, is this: that a way of life which was in some sensebetter than some previous way of life was first advocated bysome individual or set of individuals, in opposition to the teachingof State and Church in their day. It follows that it cannotalways be wrong for an individual to set himself up in moralquestions, even against the judgement of all mankind up to hisday. In science, every one now admits the corresponding doctrine;but in science the ways of testing a new doctrine areknown, and it soon comes to be generally accepted, or elserejected on other grounds than tradition. In ethics, no suchobvious ways exist by which a new doctrine can be tested. Aprophet may preface his teaching ‘thus saith the Lord’, which issufficient for him; but how are other people to know that hepower and moral codes 199has had a genuine revelation? Deuteronomy, oddly enough, proposesthe same test as is often held to be conclusive in science,namely success in prediction: ‘And if thou say in thine heart,How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken?When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thingfollow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lordhath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously.’4 But the modern mind can hardly accept this test of anethical doctrine.We must face the question: What is meant by an ethicaldoctrine, and in what ways, if any, can it be tested?Historically, ethics is connected with religion. For mostmen, authority has sufficed: what is laid down as right or wrongby the Bible or the Church is right or wrong. But certain individualshave, from time to time, been divinely inspired: theyhave known what was right or wrong because God spoke directlyto them. These individuals, according to orthodox opinion,all lived a long time ago, and if a modern man professes to beone of them it is best to put him in an asylum, unless, indeed,the Church sanctions his pronouncements. This, however, ismerely the usual situation of the rebel become dictator and doesnot help us to decide what are the legitimate functions of rebels.Can we translate ethics into non-theological terms? Victorianfreethinkers had no doubt that this was, possible. The utilitarians,for instance, were highly moral men, and were convincedthat their morality had a rational basis. The matter is, however,rather more difficult than it appeared to them.Let us consider a question suggested by the mention of theutilitarians, namely: can a rule of conduct ever be a selfsubsistentproposition of ethics, or must it always be deducedfrom the good or bad effects of the conduct in question? Thetraditional view is that certain kinds of acts are sinful, and certain4 Deuteronomy, xviii, 21, 22.200 power and moral codesothers virtuous, independently of their effects. Other kinds ofacts are ethically neutral, and may be judged by their results.Whether euthanasia or marriage with a deceased wife’s sistershould be legalised is an ethical question, but the gold standardis not. There are two definitions of ‘ethical’ questions, eitherof which will cover the cases to which this adjective is applied.A question is ‘ethical’ (1) if it interested the ancient Hebrews,(2) if it is one on which the Archbishop of Canterbury is theofficial expert. It is obvious that this common use of the word‘ethical’ is wholly indefensible.Nevertheless, I find, speaking personally, that there are kindsof conduct against which I feel a repugnance which seems to meto be moral, but to be not obviously based upon an estimate ofconsequences. I am informed by many people that the preservationof democracy, which I think important, can only be securedby gassing immense numbers of children and doing a number ofother horrible things. I find that, at this point, I cannot acquiescein the use of such means. I tell myself that they will not secure theend, or that, if they do, they will incidentally have other effects soevil as to outweigh any good that democracy might do. I am notquite sure how far this argument is honest: I think I should refuseto use such means even if I were persuaded that they wouldsecure the end and that no others would. Per contra, psychologicalimagination assures me that nothing that I should think goodcan possibly be achieved by such means. On the whole, I thinkthat, speaking philosophically, all acts ought to be judged bytheir effects; but as this is difficult and uncertain and takes time,it is desirable, in practice, that some kinds of acts should becondemned and others praised without waiting to investigateconsequences. I should say, therefore, with the utilitarians, thatthe right act, in any given circumstances, is that which, on thedata, will probably produce the greatest balance of good overevil of all the acts that are possible; but that the performance ofsuch acts may be promoted by the existence of a moral code.power and moral codes 201Accepting this view, ethics is reduced to defining ‘good’ and‘bad’, not as means, but as ends in themselves. The utilitariansays that the good is pleasure and the bad is pain. But if someonedisagrees with him, what arguments can he produce?Consider various views as to the ends of life. One man says‘the good is pleasure’; another, ‘the good is pleasure for Aryansand pain for Jews’; another, ‘the good is to praise God and glorifyHim forever’. What are these three men asserting, and whatmethods exist by which they can convince each other? Theycannot, as men of science do, appeal to facts: no facts are relevantto the dispute. Their difference is in the realm of desire, not inthe realm of statements about matters of fact. I do not assert thatwhen I say ‘this is good’ I mean ‘I desire this’; it is only aparticular kind of desire that leads me to call a thing good. Thedesire must be in some degree impersonal; it must have to dowith the sort of world that would content me, not only with mypersonal circumstances. A king might say: ‘Monarchy is good,and I am glad I am a monarch.’ The first part of this statementis indubitably ethical, but his pleasure in being a monarch onlybecomes ethical if a survey persuades him that no one elsewould make such a good king.I have suggested on a former occasion (in Religion and Science)that a judgement of intrinsic value is to be interpreted, not as anassertion, but as an expression of desire concerning the desiresof mankind. When I say ‘hatred is bad’, I am really saying:‘Would that no one felt hatred.’ I make no assertion; I merelyexpress a certain type of wish. The bearer can gather that I feelthis wish but that is the only fact that he can gather, and that is afact of psychology. There are no facts of ethics.The great ethical innovators have not been men who knew morethan others; they have been men who desired more, or, to be moreaccurate, men whose desires were more impersonal and of largerscope than those of average men. Most men desire their ownhappiness; a considerable percentage desire the happiness of their202 power and moral codeschildren; not a few desire the happiness of their nation; some,genuinely and strongly, desire the happiness of all mankind.These men, seeing that many others have no such feeling, and thatthis is an obstacle to universal felicity, wish that others felt as theydo; this wish can be expressed in the words ‘happiness is good’.All great moralists, from Buddha and the Stoics down torecent times, treated the good as something to be, if possible,enjoyed by all men equally. They did not think of themselves asprinces or Jews or Greeks; they thought of themselves merely ashuman beings. Their ethic had always a twofold source: on theone hand, they valued certain elements in their own lives; on theother hand, sympathy made them desire for others what theydesired for themselves. Sympathy is the universalising force inethics; I mean sympathy as an emotion, not as a theoreticalprinciple. Sympathy is in some degree instinctive: a child may bemade unhappy by another child’s cry. But limitations of sympathyare also natural. The cat has no sympathy for the mouse;the Romans had no sympathy for any animals except elephants;the Nazis have none for Jews, and Stalin had none for kulaks.Where there is limitation of sympathy there is a correspondinglimitation in the conception of the good: the good becomessomething to be enjoyed only by the magnanimous man, oronly by the superman, or the Aryan, or the proletarian, or theChristadelphian. All these are cat-and-mouse ethics.The refutation of a cat-and-mouse ethic, where it is possible,is practical, not theoretical. Two adepts at such an ethic, likequarrelsome little boys, each begin: ‘Let’s play I’m the cat andyou’re the mouse.’ ‘No, no,’ they each retort, ‘you shan’t bethe cat, I will.’ And so, more often than not, they become theKilkenny cats. But if one of them succeeds completely, he mayestablish his ethic; we then get Kipling and the White Man’sBurden, or the Nordic Race, or some such creed of inequality.Such creeds, inevitably, appeal only to the cat, not to the mouse;they are imposed on the mouse by naked power.power and moral codes 203Ethical controversies are very often as to means, not ends.Slavery may be attacked by the argument that it is uneconomic;the subjection of woman may be criticised by maintaining thatthe conversation of free women is more interesting; persecutionmay be deplored on the gound (wholly fallacious, incidentally)that the religious convictions produced by it are not genuine.Behind such arguments, however, there is generally a differenceas to ends. Sometimes, as in Nietzsche’s criticism of Christianity,the difference of ends becomes nakedly apparent. In Christianethics, all men count alike; for Nietzsche, the majority are only ameans to the hero. Controversies as to ends cannot be conducted,like scientific controversies, by appeals to facts; they must beconducted by an attempt to change men’s feelings. The Christianmay endeavour to rouse sympathy, the Nietzschean may stimulatepride. Economic and military power may reinforce propaganda.The contest is, in short, an ordinary contest for power.Any creed, even one which teaches universal equality, may bea means to the domination of a section; this happened, forinstance, when the French Revolution set to work to spreaddemocracy by force of arms.Power is the means, in ethical contests as in those of politics.But with the ethical systems that have had most influence in thepast, power is not the end. Although men hate one another,exploit one another, and torture one another, they have, untilrecently, given their reverence to those who preached a differentway of life. The great religions that aimed at universalityreplacing the tribal and national cults of earlier times, consideredmen as men, not as Jew or Gentile, bond or free. Theirfounders were men whose sympathy was universal, and whowere felt, on this account, to be possessed of a wisdom surpassingthat of temporary and passionate despots. The result was notall that the founders could have wished. At an auto-da-fé, the mobhad to be prevented by the police from attacking the victims, andwas furious if one whom it had hoped to see burnt alive suc-204 power and moral codesceeded, by a tardy recantation, in winning the privilege of beingstrangled first and burnt afterwards. Nevertheless, the principleof universal sympathy conquered first one province, thenanother. It is the analogue, in the realm of feeling, of impersonalcuriosity in the realm of intellect; both alike are essential elementsin mental growth. I do not think that the return to a tribal oraristocratic ethic can be of long duration; the whole history ofman since the time of Buddha points in the opposite direction.However passionately power may be desired, it is not power thatis thought good in moments of reflective meditation. This isproved by the characters of the men whom mankind havethought most nearly divine.The traditional moral rules that we considered at the beginningof this chapter—filial piety, wifely submission, loyalty tokings, and so on—have all decayed completely or partially. Theymay be succeeded, as in the Renaissance, by an absence of moralrestraint, or, as in the Reformation, by a new code in many waysmore strict than those that have become obsolete. Loyalty to theState plays a much larger part in positive morality in our timethan it did formerly; this, of course, is the natural result of theincrease in the power of the State. The parts of morals that areconcerned with other groups, such as the family and the Church,have less control than they used to have; but I do not see anyevidence that, on the balance, moral principles or moral sentimentshave less influence over man’s actions now than in theeighteenth century or the Middle Ages.Let us end this chapter with a summary analysis. The moralcodes of primitive societies are generally believed, in those societies,to have a supernatural origin; in part, we can see no reasonfor this belief, but to a considerable extent it represents the balanceof power in the community concerned: the gods considersubmission to the powerful a duty, but the powerful must not beso ruthless as to rouse rebellion. Under the influence of prophetsand sages, however, a new morality arises, sometimes side bypower and moral codes 205side with the old one, sometimes in place of it. Prophets andsages, with few exceptions, have valued things other than powerem;wisdom, justice, or universal love, for example—and havepersuaded large sections of mankind that these are aims moreworthy to be pursued than personal success. Those who sufferby some part of the social system which the prophet or sagewishes to alter have personal reasons for supporting his opinion;it is the union of their self-seeking with his impersonal ethic thatmakes the resulting revolutionary movement irresistible.We can now arrive at some conclusion as to the place ofrebellion in social life. Rebellion is of two sorts: it may be purelypersonal, or it may be inspired by desire for a different kind ofcommunity from that in which the rebel finds himself. In thelatter case, his desire can be shared by others; in many instances,it has been shared by all except a small minority who profited bythe existing system. This type of rebel is constructive, notanarchic; even if his movement leads to temporary anarchy, it isintended to give rise, in the end, to a new stable community. It isthe impersonal character of his aims that distinguishes him fromthe anarchic rebel. Only the event can decide, for the generalpublic, whether a rebellion will come to be thought justified;when it is thought to have been justified, previously existingauthority would have been wise, from its own point of view, innot offering a desperate resistance. An individual may perceive away of life, or a method of social organisation, by which more ofthe desires of mankind could be satisfied than under the existingmethod. If he perceives truly, and can persuade men to adopt hisreform, he is justified. Without rebellion, mankind would stagnate,and injustice would be irremediable. The man who refusesto obey authority has, therefore, in certain circumstances, a legitimatefunction, provided his disobedience has motives whichare social rather than personal. But the matter is one as to which,by its very nature, it is impossible to lay down rules.206 power and moral codes16POWER PHILOSOPHIESMy purpose, in this chapter, is to consider certain philosophieswhich are inspired mainly by love of power. I do not mean thatpower is their subject-matter, but that it is the philosopher’sconscious or unconscious motive in his metaphysics and in hisethical judgements.Our beliefs result from the combination, in varying degrees,of desire with observation. In some, the part of the one factor isvery slight; in others, that of the other. What can be strictlyestablished by empirical evidence is very little, and when ourbeliefs go beyond this, desire plays a part in their genesis. On theother hand, few beliefs long survive definite conclusive evidenceof their falsity, though they may survive for many ages whenthere is no evidence either for or against them.Philosophies are more unified than life. In life, we have manydesires, but a philosophy is usually inspired by some onedominant desire which gives it coherence.Zu fragmentarisch ist Welt and Leben.Ich will mich zum deutschen Professor begeben,Derweiss das Leben zusammenzusetzen,Und er macht ein verständig System daraus.1Various desires have dominated the work of philosophers.There is the desire to know, and what is by no means the samething, the desire to prove that the world is knowable. There is thedesire for happiness, the desire for virtue, and—a synthesis ofthese two—the desire for salvation. There is the desire for thesense of union with God or with other human beings. There isthe desire for beauty, the desire for enjoyment, and finally, thedesire for power.The great religions aim at virtue, but usually also at somethingmore. Christianity and Buddhism seek salvation, and, in theirmore mystical forms, union with God or with the universe.Empirical philosophies seek truth, while idealist philosophies,from Descartes to Kant, seek certainty; practically all the greatphilosophers, down to Kant (inclusive) are concerned mainlywith desires belonging to the cognitive part of human nature.The philosophy of Bentham and the Manchester School considerspleasure the end, and wealth the principal means. Thepower philosophies of modern times have arisen largely as areaction against ‘Manchesterismus’, and as a protest against theview that the purpose of life is a series of pleasures—an aimwhich is condemned as both too fragmentary and insufficientlyactive.Human life being a perpetual interaction between volitionand uncontrollable facts, the philosopher who is guided by hispower impulses seeks to minimise or decry the part played byfacts that are not the result of our own will. I am thinking now1 The world and life are too fragmentary. I will betake myself to the GermanProfessor; he knows how to synthesise life and he makes an intelligible systemout of it.208 power philosophiesnot merely of men who glorify naked power, like Machiavelliand Thrasymachus in the Republic; I am thinking of men whoinvent theories which veil their own love of power beneath agarment of metaphysics or ethics. The first of such philosophersin modern times, and also the most thorough-going, isFichte.The philosophy of Fichte starts from the ego, as the soleexistent in the world. The ego exists because it posits itself.Although nothing else exists, the ego one day gets a little knock(ein kleiner Anstoss), as a result of which it posits the non-ego.It then proceeds to various emanations, not unlike those ofGnostic Theology; but whereas the Gnostics attributed theemanations to God, and thought humbly of themselves, Fichteconsiders the distinction between God and the ego unnecessary.When the ego has done with metaphysics, it proceeds to positthat the Germans are good and the French are bad, and thatit is therefore the duty of the Germans to fight Napoleon. Boththe Germans and the French, of course, are only emanationsof Fichte, but the Germans are a higher emanation, that is to say,they are nearer to the one ultimate reality, which is Fichte’s ego.Alexander and Augustus asserted that they were gods, and compelledothers to pretend agreement; Fichte, not being in controlof the government, lost his job on a charge of atheism, since hecould not well proclaim his own divinity.It is obvious that a metaphysic such as Fichte’s leaves no placefor social duties, since the outer world is merely a product ofmy dream. The only imaginable ethic compatible with this philosophyis that of self-development. Illogically, however, a manmay consider his family and his nation more intimately a partof his ego than other human beings, and therefore more to bevalued. Belief in race and nationalism is thus a psychologicallynatural outcome of a solipsistic philosophy—all the more sincelove of power obviously inspires the theory, and power can onlybe achieved with the help of others.power philosophies 209All this is known as ‘idealism’, and is considered morallynobler than a philosophy which admits the reality of theexternal world.The reality of what is independent of my own will isembodied, for philosophy, in the conception of ‘truth’. Thetruth of my beliefs, in the view of common sense, does notdepend, in most cases, upon anything that I can do. It is true thatif I believe I shall eat my breakfast tomorrow, my belief, if true, isso partly in virtue of my own future volition; but if I believe thatCaesar was murdered on the Ides of March, what makes mybelief true lies wholly outside the power of my will. Philosophiesinspired by love of power find this situation unpleasant,and therefore set to work, in various ways, to undermine thecommonsense conception of facts as the sources of truth orfalsehood in beliefs. Hegelians maintain that truth does not consistin agreement with fact, but in the mutual consistency of thewhole system of our beliefs. All your beliefs are true if, like theevents in a good novel, they all fit together; there is, in fact, nodifference between truth for the novelist and truth for the historian.This gives freedom to creative fancy, which it liberates fromthe shackles of the supposed ‘real’ world.Pragmatism, in some of its forms, is a power-philosophy. Forpragmatism, a belief is ‘true’ if its consequences are pleasant.Now human beings can make the consequences of a belief pleasantor unpleasant. Belief in the superior merit of a dictatorhas pleasanter consequences than disbelief, if you live under hisgovernment. Wherever there is effective persecution, the officialcreed is ‘true’ in the pragmatist sense. The pragmatist philosophy,therefore, gives to those in power a metaphysical omnipotencewhich a more pedestrian philosophy would deny tothem. I do not suggest that most pragmatists admit these consequencesof their philosophy; I say only that they are consequences,and that the pragmatist’s attack on the common viewof truth is an outcome of love of power, though perhaps more of210 power philosophiespower over inanimate nature than of power over other humanbeings.Bergson’s Creative Evolution is a power-philosophy, whichhas been developed fantastically in the last Act of Bernard Shaw’sBack to Methuselah. Bergson holds that the intellect is to be condemnedas unduly passive and merely contemplative, and thatwe only see truly during vigorous action such as a cavalrycharge. He believes that animals acquired eyes because they feltthat it would be pleasant to be able to see; their intellects wouldnot have been able to think about seeing, since they were blind,but intuition was able to perform this miracle. All evolution,according to him, is due to desire, and there is no limit to whatcan be achieved if desire is sufficiently passionate. The gropingattempts of bio-chemists to understand the mechanism of lifeare futile, since life is not mechanical, and its development isalways such as the intellect is inherently incapable of imaginingin advance; it is only in action that life can be understood. Itfollows that men should be passionate and irrational; fortunatelyfor Bergson’s happiness, they usually are.Some philosophers do not allow their power impulses todominate their metaphysics, but give them free rein in ethics. Ofthese, the most important is Nietzsche, who rejects Christianmorality as that of slaves, and supplies in its place a moralitysuitable to heroic rulers. This is, of course, not essentially new.Something of it is to be found in Heraclitus, something in Plato,much in the Renaissance. But in Nietzsche it is worked out, andset up in conscious opposition to the teaching of the New Testament.In his view, the herd have no value on their ownaccount, but only as means to the greatness of the hero, who hasa right to inflict injury upon them if thereby he can further hisown self-development. In practice, aristocracies have alwaysacted in a manner which only some such ethic could justify; butChristian theory has held that in the sight of God all men areequal. Democracy can appeal to Christian teaching for support;power philosophies 211but for aristocracy the best ethic is Nietzsche’s. ‘If there weregods, how could I bear to be not a god? Therefore there are nogods.’ So says Nietzsche’s Zarathustra. God must be dethroned tomake room for earthly tyrants.The love of power is a part of normal human nature, butpower-philosophies are, in a certain precise sense, insane. Theexistence of the external world, both that of matter and that ofother human beings, is a datum, which may be humiliating to acertain kind of pride, but can only be denied by a madman. Menwho allow their love of power to give them a distorted view ofthe world are to be found in every asylum: one man will thinkhe is the Governor of the Bank of England, another will think heis the King, and yet another will think he is God. Highly similardelusions, if expressed by educated men in obscure language,lead to professorships of philosophy; and if expressed by emotionalmen in eloquent language, lead to dictatorships. Certifiedlunatics are shut up because of their proneness to violence whentheir pretensions are questioned; the uncertified variety are giventhe control of powerful armies, and can inflict death and disasterupon all sane men within their reach. The success of insanity, inliterature, in philosophy, and in politics, is one of the peculiaritiesof our age, and the successful form of insanity proceedsalmost entirely from impulses towards power.To understand this situation, we must consider the relation ofpower philosophies to social life, which is more complex thanmight have been expected.Let us begin with solipsism. When Fichte maintains thateverything starts from the ego, the reader does not say: ‘Everythingstart from Johann Gottlieb Fichte! How absurd! Why, Inever heard of him till a few days ago. And how about the timesbefore he was born? Does he really imagine that he inventedthem? What ridiculous conceit!’ This, I repeat, is what the readerdoes not say; he substitutes himself for Fichte, and finds theargument not unplausible. ‘After all,’ he thinks, ‘what do I know212 power philosophiesof past times? Only that I have had certain experiences which Ichose to interpret as related to a period before I was born. Andwhat do I know of places I have never seen? Only that I have seenthem on the map, have read of them, or have heard tell of them. Iknow only my own experience; the rest is doubtful, inference. IfI choose to put myself in the place of God, and say that the worldis my creation, nothing can prove to me that I am mistaken.’Fichte maintains that there is only Fichte, and John Smith, readingthe argument, concludes that there is only John Smith,without ever noticing that this is not what Fichte says.In this way it is possible for solipsism to become the basis fora certain kind of social life. A collection of lunatics, each ofwhom thinks he is God, may learn to behave politely to oneanother. But the politeness will only last as long as each Godfinds his omnipotence not thwarted by any of the other divinities.If Mr A thinks he is God, he may tolerate the pretensionsof others so long as their acts minister to his purposes. But ifMr B ventures to thwart him, and to provide evidence that he isnot omnipotent, Mr A’s wrath will be kindled, and he will perceivethat Mr B is Satan or one of his ministers. Mr B, of course,will take the same view of Mr A. Each will form a party, andthere will be war—theological war, bitter, cruel, and mad. For‘Mr A’ read Hitler, for ‘Mr B’ read Stalin, and you have a pictureof the modern world. ‘I am Wotan!’ says Hitler. ‘I am DialecticalMaterialism!’ says Stalin. And since the claim of each is supportedby vast resources in the way of armies, aeroplanes, poisongases, and innocent enthusiasts, the madness of both remainsunnoticed.Take, next, Nietzsche’s cult of the hero, to whom the ‘bungledand botched’ are to be sacrificed. The admiring reader is, ofcourse, convinced that he himself is a hero, whereas that rascalso-and-so, who has got ahead of him by unscrupulous intrigues,is one of the bungled and botched. It follows that Nietzsche’sphilosophy is excellent. But if so-and-so also reads it, and alsopower philosophies 213admires it, how is it to be decided which is the hero? Obviouslyonly by war. And when one of the two has achieved victory, hewill have to keep on proving his right to the title of hero byremaining in power. In order to do this, he must create a vigoroussecret police; he will live in fear of assassination, every oneelse will be terrified of delation, and the cult of heroism will endby producing a nation of trembling poltroons.The same sort of troubles arise with the pragmatist theory thata belief is true if the consequences are pleasant. Pleasant towhom? Belief in Stalin is pleasant for him, but unpleasant forTrotsky. Belief in Hitler is pleasant for the Nazis, but unpleasantfor those whom they put in concentration camps. Nothing butnaked force can decide the question: who is to enjoy the pleasantconsequences which prove that a belief is true?Power philosophies, when account is taken of their socialconsequences, are self-refuting. The belief that I am God, if noone shares it, leads to my being shut up; if others share it, it leadsto a war in which I probably perish. The cult of the hero producesa nation of cowards. Belief in pragmatism, if widespread,leads to the rule of naked force, which is unpleasant; therefore,by its own criterion, belief in pragmatism is false. If social life isto satisfy social desires, it must be based upon some philosophynot derived from the love of power.214 power philosophies17THE ETHICS OF POWERWe have been concerned so much, in the preceding pages, withthe evils connected with power, that it might seem natural todraw an ascetic conclusion, and to urge, as the best manner oflife for the individual, a complete renunciation of all attempts toinfluence others, whether for good or evil. Ever since Lao-Tse,this view has had advocates who were both eloquent and wise;it has been held by many mystics, by the quietists, and by thosewho valued personal holiness, conceived as a state of mindrather than as an activity. I cannot agree with these men,although I admit that some of them have been highly beneficent.But they have been so because, though they believed that theyhad renounced power, they had, in fact, renounced it only incertain forms; if they had renounced it completely, they wouldnot have proclaimed their doctrines, and would not have beenbeneficent. They renounced coercive power, but not the powerthat rests upon persuasion.Love of power, in its widest sense, is the desire to be able toproduce intended effects upon the outer world, whether humanor non-human. This desire is an essential part of human nature,and in energetic men it is a very large and important part. Everydesire, if it cannot be instantly gratified, brings about a wish forthe ability to gratify it, and therefore some form of the love ofpower. This is true of the best desires as well as the worst. If youlove your neighbour, you will wish for power to make himhappy. To condemn all love of power, therefore, is to condemnlove of your neighbour.There is, however, a great difference between power desired asa means and power desired as an end in itself. The man whodesires power as a means has first some other desire, and is thenled to wish that he were in a position to achieve it. The man whodesires power as an end will choose his objective by the possibilityof securing it. In politics, for example, one man wishes to seecertain measures enacted, and is thus led to take part in publicaffairs while another man, wishing only for personal success,adopts whatever programme seems most likely to lead to thisresult.Christ’s third temptation in the wilderness illustrates thisdistinction. He is offered all the kingdoms of the earth if He willfall down and worship Satan; that is to say, He is offered powerto achieve certain objects, but not those that He has in view.This temptation is one to which almost every modern man isexposed, sometimes in a gross form, sometimes in a very subtleone. He may, though a Socialist, accept a position on a Conservativenewspaper; this is a comparatively gross form. He may despairof the achievement of Socialism by peaceful means, andbecome a Communist, not because he thinks that what he wantswill be achieved in this way, but because he thinks that somethingwill be achieved. To advocate unsuccessfully what he wantsseems to him more futile than to advocate successfully what hedoes not want. But if his wants, other than personal success, arestrong and definite, there will be no satisfaction to his sense ofpower unless those wants are satisfied, and to change his objects216 the ethics of powerfor the sake of success will seem to him an act of apostasy whichmight be described as worshipping Satan.Love of power, if it is to be beneficent, must be bound up withsome end other than power. I do not mean that there must be nolove of power for its own sake, for this motive is sure to arise inthe course of an active career; I mean that the desire for someother end must be so strong that power is unsatisfying unless itministers to this end.It is not enough that there should be a purpose other thanpower; it is necessary that this purpose should be one which, ifachieved, will help to satisfy the desires of others. If you aim atdiscovery, or artistic creation, or the invention of a labour-savingmachine, or the reconciliation of groups hitherto at enmity witheach other, your success, if you succeed, is likely to be a cause ofsatisfactions to others besides yourself. This is the second conditionthat love of power must fulfil if it is to be beneficent: it mustbe linked to some purpose which is, broadly speaking, in harmonywith the desires of the other people who will be affected ifthe purpose is realised.There is a third condition, somewhat more difficult to formulate.The means of realising your purpose must not be such aswill incidentally have bad effects outweighing the excellence ofthe end to be achieved. Every man’s character and desiresundergo perpetual modification as a result of what he does andwhat he suffers. Violence and injustice breed violence andinjustice; both in those who inflict them and in their victims.Defeat, if it is incomplete, breeds rage and hatred, while if it iscomplete it breeds apathy and inaction. Victory by force producesruthlessness and contempt for the vanquished, howeverexalted may have been the original motives for war. All theseconsiderations, while they do not prove that no good purposecan ever be achieved by force, do show that force is very dangerous,and that when there is very much of it any original goodpurpose is likely to be lost sight of before the end of the strife.the ethics of power 217The existence of civilised communities, however, is impossiblewithout some element of force, since there are criminalsand men of anti-social ambitions who, if unchecked, wouldsoon cause a reversion to anarchy and barbarism. Where forceis unavoidable, it should be exerted by the constituted authorityin accordance with the will of the community as expressedin the criminal law. There are, however, two difficulties at thispoint; first, that the most important uses of force are betweendifferent States, where there is no common government andno effectively acknowledged law or judicial authority; second,that the concentration of force in the hands of the governmentenables it, to some extent, to tyrannise over the rest of thecommunity. Each of these difficulties I shall consider in thenext chapter. In the present chapter I am considering powerin relation to individual morality, not in relation to thegovernment.Love of power, like lust, is such a strong motive that it influencesmost men’s actions more than they think it should. It maytherefore be argued that the ethic which will produce the bestconsequences will be one more hostile to love of power thanreason can justify: since men are pretty sure to sin against theirown code in the direction of the pursuit of power, their acts, itmay be said, will be about right if their code is somewhat toosevere. A man who is propounding an ethical doctrine can, however,hardly allow himself to be influenced by such considerations,since, if he does, he is obliged to lie consciously in theinterests of virtue. The desire to be edifying rather than truthfulis the bane of preachers and educators; and whatever may be saidin its favour theoretically, it is in practice unmitigatedly harmful.We must admit that men have acted badly from love of power,and will continue to do so; but we ought not, on this account, tomaintain that love of power is undesirable in forms and circumstancesin which we believe it to be beneficial or at leastinnocuous.218 the ethics of powerThe forms that a man’s love of power will take depend uponhis temperament, his opportunities, and his skill; his temperament,moreover, is largely moulded by his circumstances. Toturn an individual’s love of power into specified channels is,therefore, a matter of providing him with the right circumstances,the right opportunities, and the appropriate type of skill.This leaves out of account the question of congenital disposition,which, in so far as it is amenable to treatment, is a matter foreugenics; but it is probably only a small percentage of the populationthat cannot be led, by the above means, to choose someuseful form of activity.To begin with circumstances as affecting temperament: thesource of cruel impulses is usually to be found either in anunfortunate childhood, or in experiences, such as those of civilwar, in which suffering and death are frequently seen andinflicted; absence of any legitimate outlet for energy in adolescenceand early youth may have the same effect. I believe thatfew men are cruel if they have had a wise early education, havenot lived among scenes of violence, and have not had unduedifficulty in finding a career. Given these conditions, most men’slove of power will prefer, if it can, to find a beneficent or at leastharmless outlet.The question of opportunity has both a positive and a negativeaspect: it is important that there shall not be opportunity forthe career of a pirate, or a brigand, or a dictator, as well as thatthere should be opportunity for a less destructive profession.There must be a strong government, to prevent crime, and a wiseeconomic system, both to prevent the possibility of legal formsof brigandage, and to offer attractive careers to as many youngpeople as possible. This is much easier in a community which isgrowing richer than in one which is growing poorer. Nothingimproves the moral level of a community as much as an increaseof wealth, and nothing lowers it so much as a diminution ofwealth. The harshness of the general outlook from the Rhine tothe ethics of power 219the Pacific at the present day is very largely due to the fact that somany people are poorer than their parents were.The importance of skill in determining the form taken by loveof power is very great. Destruction, broadly speaking, apart fromcertain forms of modern war, requires very little skill, whereasconstruction always requires some, and in the highest formsrequires a great deal. Most men who have acquired a difficulttype of skill enjoy exercising it, and prefer this activity to easierones; this is because the difficult kind of skill, other things beingequal, is more satisfying to love of power. The man who haslearnt to throw bombs from an aeroplane will prefer this to thehumdrum occupations that will be open to him in peace time;but the man who has learnt (say) to combat yellow fever willprefer this to the work of an army surgeon in war time. Modernwar involves a very great deal of skill, and this helps to make itattractive to various kinds of experts. Much scientific skill isneeded equally in peace and in war; there is no way by which ascientific pacifist can make sure that his discoveries or inventionswill not be used to increase the destruction in the next struggle.Nevertheless, there is, speaking broadly, a distinction betweenthe kinds of skill that find most scope in peace and those thatfind most scope in war. In so far as such a distinction exists, aman’s love of power will incline him to peace if his skill is of theformer kind, and to war if it is of the latter. In such ways, technicaltraining can do much to determine what form love ofpower shall take.It is not altogether true that persuasion is one thing and forceis another. Many forms of persuasion—even many of whicheverybody approves—are really a kind of force. Consider whatwe do to our children. We do not say to them: ‘Some peoplethink the earth is round, and others think it is flat; when yougrow up, you can, if you like, examine the evidence and formyour own conclusion.’ Instead of this we say: ‘The earth isround.’ By the time our children are old enough to examine220 the ethics of powerthe evidence, our propaganda has closed their minds, and themost persuasive arguments of the Flat Earth Society make noimpression. The same applies to the moral precepts that weconsider really important, such as ‘don’t pick your nose’ or‘don’t eat peas with a knife’. There may, for aught I know, beadmirable reasons for eating peas with a knife, but the hypnoticeffect of early persuasion has made me completely incapable ofappreciating them.The ethics of power cannot consist in distinguishing somekinds of power as legitimate and others as illegitimate. As wehave just seen, we all approve, in certain cases, of a kind ofpersuasion which is essentially a use of force. Almost everybodywould approve of physical violence, even killing, in easilyimagined conditions. Suppose you had come upon Guy Fawkesin the very act of firing the train, and suppose you could onlyhave prevented the disaster by shooting him; most pacifists,even, would admit that you would have done right to shoot. Theattempt to deal with the question by abstract general principles,praising acts of one type and blaming acts of another, is futile;we must judge the exercise of power by its effects, and we musttherefore first make up our minds as to what effects we desire.For my part, I consider that whatever is good or bad isembodied in individuals, not primarily in communities. Somephilosophies which could be used to support the corporativeState—notably the philosophy of Hegel—attribute ethical qualitiesto communities as such, so that a State may be admirablethough most of its citizens are wretched. I think that such philosophiesare tricks for justifying the privileges of the holdersof power, and that, whatever our politics may be, there can beno valid argument for an undemocratic ethic. I mean by anundemocratic ethic one which singles out a certain portion ofmankind and says ‘these men are to enjoy the good things, andthe rest are merely to minister to them’. I should reject such anethic in any case, but it has, as we saw in the last chapter, thethe ethics of power 221disadvantage of being self-refuting, since it is very unlikely that,in practice, the supermen will be able to live the kind of life thatthe aristocratic theorist imagines for them.Some objects of desire are such as can, logically, be enjoyedby all, while others must, by their very nature, be confined to aportion of the community. All might—with a little rationalcooperation—be fairly well off, but it is impossible for all toenjoy a pleasure of being richer than their neighbours. All canenjoy a certain degree of self-direction, but it is impossible forall to be dictators over others. Perhaps in time there will be apopulation, in which everybody is fairly intelligent, but it isnot possible for all to secure the rewards bestowed on exceptionalintelligence, And so on.Social cooperation is possible in regard to the good things thatare capable of being universal—adequate material well-being,health, intelligence, and every form of happiness which does notconsist in superiority to others. But the forms of happinesswhich consist of victory in a competition cannot be universal.The former kind of happiness is promoted by friendly feeling,the latter (and its correlative unhappiness) by unfriendly feeling.Unfriendly feeling can wholly inhibit the rational pursuit ofhappiness; it does so at present in what concerns the economicrelations of nations. Given a population in which friendly feelingspreponderate, there will be no clash between the interestsof different individuals or different groups; the clashes which atpresent exist are caused by unfriendly feeling, which they inturn intensify. England and Scotland fought each other for centuries;at last, by an accident of inheritance, they came to havethe same king, and the wars ceased. Everybody was happier inconsequence, even Dr Johnson, whose jests doubtless affordedhim more pleasure than he would have derived from victoriousbattles.We can now arrive at certain conclusions on the subject of theethics of power.222 the ethics of powerThe ultimate aim of those who have power (and we all havesome) should be to promote social cooperation, not in onegroup as against another, but in the whole human race. The chiefobstacle to this end at present is the existence of feelings ofunfriendliness and desire for superiority. Such feelings can bediminished either directly by religion and morality, or indirectlyby removing the political and economic circumstances forpower between States and the connected competition for wealthbetween large national industries. Both methods are needed:they are not alternatives, but supplement each other.The Great War, and its aftermath of dictatorships, has causedmany to underestimate all forms of power except military andgovernmental force. This is a short-sighted and unhistoricalview. If I had to select four men who have had more power thanany others, I should mention Buddha and Christ, Pythagoras andGalileo. No one of these four had the support of the State untilafter his propaganda had achieved a great measure of success. Noone of the four had much success in his own lifetime. No one ofthe four would have affected human life as he has done if powerhad been his primary object. No one of the four sought the kindof power that enslaves others, but the kind that sets them free—in the case of the first two, by showing how to master the desiresthat lead to strife, and thence to defeat slavery and subjection; inthe case of the second two, by pointing the way towards controlof natural forces. It is not ultimately by violence that men areruled, but by the wisdom of those who appeal to the commondesires of mankind, for happiness, for inward and outwardpeace, and for the understanding of the world in which, by nochoice of our own, we have to live.the ethics of power 22318THE TAMING OF POWER‘In passing by the side of Mount Thai, Confucius came on awoman who was weeping bitterly by a grave. The Master pressedforward and drove quickly to her, then he sent Tze-lu to questionher. “Your wailing,” said he, “is that of one who has sufferedsorrow on sorrow.” She replied, “That is so. Once myhusband’s father was killed here by a tiger. My husband was alsokilled, and now my son has died in the same way.” The Mastersaid, “Why do you not leave this place?” the answer was “Thereis no oppressive government here.” The Master then said,“Remember this, my children: oppressive government is moreterrible than tigers.” ’The subject of the present chapter is the problem of insuringthat government shall be less terrible than tigers.The problem of the taming of power is, as the above quotationshows, a very ancient one. The Taoists thought it insoluble, andadvocated anarchism; the Confucians trusted to a certain ethicaland governmental training which should turn the holders ofpower into sages endowed with moderation and benevolence. Atthe same period, in Greece, democracy, oligarchy, and tyrannywere contending for mastery; democracy was intended to checkabuses of power, but was perpetually defeating itself by falling avictim to the temporary popularity of some demagogue. Plato,like Confucius, sought the solution in a government of mentrained to wisdom. This view has been revived by Mr and MrsSidney Webb, who admire an oligarchy in which power is confinedto those who have the ‘vocation of leadership’. In theinterval between Plato and the Webbs, the world has tried militaryautocracy, theocracy, hereditary monarchy, oligarchy,democracy, and the Rule of the Saints—the last of these, after thefailure of Cromwell’s experiment, having been revived in ourday by Lenin and Hitler. All this suggests that our problem hasnot yet been solved.To anyone who studies history or human nature, it must beevident that democracy, while not a complete solution, is anessential part of the solution. The complete solution is not to befound by confining ourselves to political conditions; we musttake account also of economics, of propaganda, and of psychologyas affected by circumstances and education. Our subjectthus divides itself into four parts: (I) political conditions, (II)economic conditions, (III) propaganda conditions, and (IV)psychological and educational conditions. Let us take these insuccession.IThe merits of democracy are negative: it does not insure goodgovernment, but it prevents certain evils. Until women began totake part in political affairs, married women had no control overtheir own property, or even over their own earnings; a charwomanwith a drunken husband had no redress if he preventedher from using her wages for support of her children. The oligarchicalParliament of the eighteenth and early nineteenththe taming of power 225centuries used its legislative power to increase the wealth of therich by depressing the condition of both rural and urban labour.Only democracy has prevented the law from making tradeunionism impossible. But for democracy, Western America,Australia, and New Zealand would be inhabited by a semi-servileyellow population governed by a small white aristocracy. Theevils of slavery and serfdom are familiar, and wherever a minorityhas a secure monopoly of political power, the majority islikely to sink, sooner or later, into either slavery or serfdom. Allhistory slows that, as might be expected, minorities cannot betrusted to care for the interests of majorities.There is a tendency, as strong now as at any former time, tosuppose that an oligarchy is admirable if it consists of ‘good’men. The government of the Roman Empire was ‘bad’ untilConstantine, and then it became ‘good’. In the Book of Kings,there were those who did right in the sight of the Lord, andthose who did evil. In English history as taught to children, thereare ‘good’ kings and ‘bad’ kings. An oligarchy of Jews is ‘bad’,but one of Nazis is ‘good’. The oligarchy of Tsarist aristocratswas ‘bad’, but that of the Communist Party is ‘good’.This attitude is unworthy of grown-up people. A child is‘good’ when it obeys orders and ‘naughty’ when it does not.When it grows up and becomes a political leader, it retains theideas of the nursery, and defines the ‘good’ as those who obeyits orders and the ‘bad’ as those who defy it. Consequently ourown political party consists of ‘good’ men, and the oppositeparty consists of ‘bad’ men. ‘Good’ government is governmentby our group, ‘bad’ government that by the other group. TheMontagues are ‘good’, the Capulets ‘bad’, or vice versa.Such a point of view, if taken seriously, makes social life impossible.Only force can decide which group is ‘good’ and which‘bad’, and the decision, when made, may at any moment be upsetby an insurrection. Neither group, if it attains power, will care forthe interests of the other, except in so far as it is controlled by the226 the taming of powerfear of rousing rebellion. Social life, if it is to be anything betterthan tyranny, demands a certain impartiality. But since, in manymatters, collective action is necessary, the only practicable formof impartiality, in such matters, is the rule of the majority.Democracy, however, though necessary, is by no means theonly political condition required for the taming of power. It ispossible, in a democracy, for the majority to exercise a brutaland wholly unnecessary tyranny over a minority. In the periodfrom 1885 to 1922, the government of the United Kingdomwas (except for the exclusion of women) democratic, but thatdid not prevent the oppression of Ireland. Not only a national,but a religious or political minority may be persecuted. Thesafeguarding of minorities, so far as is compatible with orderlygovernment, is an essential part of the taming of power.This requires a consideration of the matters as to which thecommunity must act as a whole, and those as to which uniformityis unnecessary. The most obvious questions as to which acollective decision is imperative are those that are essentiallygeographical. Roads, railways, sewers, gas mains, and so on,must take one course and not another. Sanitary precautions, sayagainst plague or rabies, are geographical: it would not do forChristian Scientists to announce that they will take no precautionsagainst infection, because they might infect others. War is ageographical phenomenon, unless it is civil war, and even then itsoon happens that one area is dominated by one side, andanother by the other.Where there is a geographically concentrated minority, suchas the Irish before 1922, it is possible to solve a great manyproblems by devolution. But when the minority is distributedthroughout the area concerned, this method is largely inapplicable.Where Christian and Mohammedan populations live side byside, they have, it is true, different marriage laws, but except wherereligion is concerned they all have to submit to one government.It has been gradually discovered that theological uniformity isthe taming of power 227not necessary to a State, and that Protestants and Catholics canlive peaceably together under one government. But this was notthe case during the first 130 years after the Reformation.The question of the degree of liberty that is compatible withorder is one that cannot be settled in the abstract. The only thingthat can be said in the abstract is that, where there is no technicalreason for a collective decision, there should be some strongreason connected with public order if freedom is to be interferedwith. In the reign of Elizabeth, when Roman Catholicswished to deprive her of the throne, it is not surprising that thegovernment viewed them with disfavour. Similarly in the LowCountries, where Protestants were in revolt against Spain, it wasto be expected that the Spaniards would persecute them. Nowadaystheological questions have not the same political importance.Even political differences, if they do not go too deep, areno reason for persecution. Conservatives, Liberals, and Labourpeople can all live peaceably side by side, because they do notwish to alter the Constitution by force; but Fascists and Communistsare more difficult to assimilate. Where there is democracy,attempts of a minority to seize power by force, andincitements to such attempts, may reasonably be forbidden, onthe ground that a law-abiding majority has a right to a quiet lifeif it can secure it. But there should be toleration of all propagandanot involving incitement to break the law, and the lawshould be as tolerant as is compatible with technical efficiencyand the maintenance of order. I shall return to this subject underthe head of psychology.From the point of view of the taming of power, very difficultquestions arise as to the best size of a governmental unit. In agreat modern State, even when it is a democracy, the ordinarycitizen has very little sense of political power; he does not decidewhat are to be the issues in an election, they probably concernmatters remote from his daily life and almost wholly outside hisexperience, and his vote makes so small a contribution to the228 the taming of powertotal as to seem to himself negligible. In the ancient City Statethese evils were much less; so they are, at present, in local government.It might have been expected that the public would takemore interest in local than in national questions, but this is notthe case; on the contrary, the larger the area concerned, thegreater the percentage of the electorate that takes the trouble tovote. This is partly because more money is spent on propagandain important elections, partly because the issues are in themselvesmore exciting. The most exciting issues are those involvingwar and relations to possible enemies. I remember an oldyokel in January 1910, who told me he was going to vote Conservative(which was against his economic interests), becausehe had been persuaded that if the Liberals were victorious theGermans would be in the country within a week. It is not to besupposed that he ever voted in Parish Council elections, thoughin them he might have had some understanding of the issues;these issues failed to move him because they were not such as togenerate mass hysteria or the myths upon which it feeds.There is thus a dilemma: democracy gives a man a feeling thathe has an effective share in political power when the groupconcerned is small, but not when it is large; on the other hand,the issue is likely to strike him as important when the groupconcerned is large, but not when it is small.To some extent this difficulty is avoided when a constituencyis vocational, not geographical; a really effective democracy ispossible, for example, in a trade union. Each branch can meet todiscuss a vexed question of policy; the members have a similarityof interest and experience, and this makes fruitful discussionpossible. The final decision of the whole union may, therefore,be one in which a large percentage of members feel they havehad a part.This method, however, has obvious limitations. Many questionsare so essentially geographical that a geographical constituencyis unavoidable. Public bodies affect our lives at so manythe taming of power 229points that a busy man who is not a politician cannot take actionabout most of the local or national issues that concern him. Thebest solution would probably be an extension of the method ofthe trade union official, who is elected to represent a certaininterest. At present, many interests have no such representative.Democracy, if it is to exist psychologically as well as politically,demands organisation of the various interests, and their representation,in political bargaining, by men who enjoy whateverinfluence is justified by the numbers and enthusiasm of theirconstituents. I do not mean that these representatives should be asubstitute for Parliament, but that they should be the channel bywhich Parliament is made aware of the wishes of various groupsof citizens.A federal system is desirable whenever the local interests andsentiments of the constituent units are stronger than the interestsand sentiments connected with the federation. If there were everan international government, it would obviously have to be afederation of national governments, with strictly definedpowers. There are already international authorities for certainpurposes, e.g. postage, but these are purposes which do notinterest the public so much as do those dealt with by nationalgovernments. Where this condition is absent, the federal governmenttends to encroach upon the governments of the severalunits. In the United States, the federal government has gained atthe expense of the States ever since the Constitution was firstenacted. The same tendency existed in Germany from 1871 to1918. Even a federal government of the world, if it found itselfinvolved in a civil war on the question of secession, as mightwell happen, would, if victorious, be immeasurably strengthenedas against the various national governments. Thus the efficacyof federation, as a method, has very definite limits; butwithin these limits it is desirable and important.Very large governmental areas are, it would seem, quiteunavoidable in the modern world; indeed, for some of the most230 the taming of powerimportant purposes, especially peace and war, the whole worldis the only adequate area. The psychological disadvantages oflarge areas—especially the sense of impotence in the averagevoter, and his ignorance as to most of the issues—must beadmitted, and minimised as far as possible, partly, as suggestedabove, by the organisation of separate interests; and partly byfederation or devolution. Some subjection of the individual is aninevitable consequence of increasing social organisation. But ifthe danger of war were eliminated, local questions would bemuch more concerned than at present with questions as towhich they could have both knowledge and an effective voice.For it is the fear of war, more than anything else, which compelsmen to direct their attention to distant countries and to theexternal activities of their own government.Where democracy exists, there is still need to safeguard individualsand minorities against tyranny, both because tyranny isundesirable in itself, and because it is likely to lead to breaches oforder. Montesquieu’s advocacy of the separation of legislative,executive, and judiciary, the traditional English belief in checksand balances, Bentham’s political doctrines and the whole ofnineteenth-century liberalism, were designed to prevent thearbitrary exercise of power. But such methods have come to beconsidered incompatible with efficiency. No doubt the separationof the War Office and the Horse Guards was a safeguardagainst military dictatorship, but it had disastrous results in theCrimean War. When, in former times, the legislature and theexecutive disagreed, the result was a highly inconvenient deadlock;now in England, efficiency is secured by uniting bothpowers, to all intents and purposes, in the Cabinet. The eighteenthand nineteenth century methods of preventing arbitrarypower no longer suit our circumstances, and such new methodsas exist are not yet very effective. There is need of associations tosafeguard this or that form of liberty, and to bring swift criticismto bear upon officials, police, magistrates, and judges whothe taming of power 231exceed their powers. There is need also of a certain politicalbalance in every important branch of the public service. Forexample, there is danger to democracy in the fact that averageopinion in the police and the air force is far more reactionarythan in the country at large.In every democracy, individuals and organisations which areintended to have only certain well-defined executive functionsare likely, if unchecked, to acquire a very undesirable independentpower. This is especially true of the police. The evils resultingfrom an insufficiently supervised police force are very forciblyset forth, as regards the United States, in Our Lawless Police, byErnest Jerome Hopkins. The gist of the matter is that a policemanis promoted for action leading to the conviction of a criminal,that the Courts accept confession as evidence of guilt, and that,in consequence, it is to the interest of individual officers totorture arrested persons until they confess. This evil exists in allcountries in a greater or less degree. In India it is rampant. Thedesire to obtain a confession was the basis of the tortures of theInquisition. In Old China, torture of suspected persons washabitual, because a humanitarian Emperor has decreed that noman should be condemned except on his own confession. Forthe taming of the power of the police, one essential is that aconfession shall never, in any circumstances, be accepted asevidence.This reform, however, though necessary, is by no means sufficient.The police system of all countries is based upon theassumption that the collection of evidence against a suspectedcriminal is a matter of public interest but that the collection ofevidence in his favour is his private concern. It is often said to bemore important that the innocent should be acquitted than thatthe guilty should be condemned, but everywhere it is the duty ofthe police to seek evidence of guilt, not of innocence. Supposeyou are unjustly accused of murder, and there is a good prima faciecase against you. The whole of the resources of the State are set232 the taming of powerin motion to seek out possible witnesses against you, and theablest lawyers are employed by the State to create prejudiceagainst you in the minds of the jury. You, meanwhile, mustspend your private fortune collecting evidence of your innocence,with no public organisation to help you. If you pleadpoverty, you will be allotted Counsel, but probably not so ablea man as the public prosecutor. If you succeed in securingan acquittal, you can only escape bankruptcy by means of thecinemas and the Sunday Press. But it is only too likely that youwill be unjustly convicted.If law-abiding citizens are to be protected against unjust persecutionby the police, there must be two police forces and twoScotland Yards, one designed, as at present, to prove guilt, theother to prove innocence; and in addition to the public prosecutorthere must be a public defender, of equal legal eminence.This is obvious as soon as it is admitted that the acquittal of theinnocent is no less a public interest than the condemnation ofthe guilty. The defending police force should, moreover, becomethe prosecuting police force where one class of crimes is concerned,namely crimes committed by the prosecuting police inthe execution of their ‘duty’. By this means, but by no other (sofar as I can see), the present oppressive power of the police couldbe mitigated.III come now to the economic conditions required in order tominimise arbitrary power. This subject is of great importance,both on its own account, and because there has been a very greatdeal of confusion of thought in relation to it.Political democracy, while it solves a part of our problem,does not by any means solve the whole. Marx pointed outthat there could be no real equalisation of power through politicsalone, while economic power remained monarchical orthe taming of power 233oligarchic. It followed that economic power must be in thehands of the State, and that the State must be democratic. Thosewho profess, at the present day, to be Marx’s followers, havekept only the half of his doctrine, and have thrown over thedemand that the State should be democratic. They have thusconcentrated both economic and political power in the hands ofan oligarchy, which has become, in consequence, more powerfuland more able to exercise tyranny than any oligarchy offormer times.Both old-fashioned democracy and new-fashioned Marxismhave aimed at the taming of power. The former failed because itwas only political, the latter because it was only economic.Without a combination of both, nothing approaching to asolution of the problem is possible.The arguments in favour of State ownership of land and thelarge economic organisations are partly technical, partly political.The technical arguments have not been much stressedexcept by the Fabian Society, and to some extent in America inconnection with such matters as the Tennessee Valley Authority.Nevertheless they are very strong, especially in connection withelectricity and water power, and cause even Conservative governmentsto introduce measures which, from a technical pointof view, are socialistic. We have seen how, as a result of moderntechnique, organisations tend to grow and to coalesce and toincrease their scope; the inevitable consequence is that the politicalState must either increasingly take over economic functions,or partially abdicate in favour of vast private enterprises whichare sufficiently powerful to defy or control it. If the State doesnot acquire supremacy over such enterprises, it becomes theirpuppet, and they become the real State. In one way or another,wherever modern technique exists, economic and politicalpower must become unified. This movement towards unificationhas the irresistible impersonal character which Marxattributed to the development that he prophesied. But it has234 the taming of powernothing to do with the class war or the wrongs of theproletariat.Socialism as a political movement has aimed at furthering theinterests of industrial wage-earners; its technical advantages havebeen kept comparatively in the background. The belief is that theeconomic power of the private capitalist enables him to oppressthe wage-earner, and that, since the wage-earner cannot, like thehandicraftsman of former times, individually own his means ofproduction, the only way of emancipating him is collectiveownership by the whole body of workers. It is argued that, ifthe private capitalist were expropriated, the whole body of theworkers would constitute the State; and that, consequently, theproblem of economic power can be solved completely by Stateownership of land and capital, and in no other way. This is aproposal for the taming of economic power, and thereforecomes within the purview of our present discussion.Before examining the argument, I wish to say unequivocallythat I consider it valid, provided it is adequately safeguarded andamplified. Per contra, in the absence of such safeguarding andamplifying I consider it very dangerous, and likely to misleadthose who seek liberation from economic tyranny so completelythat they will find they have inadvertently established a newtyranny at once economic and political, more drastic and moreterrible than any previously known.In the first place, ‘ownership’ is not the same thing as ‘control’.If, say, a railway is owned by the State, and the State isconsidered to be the whole body of the citizens, that does notinsure, of itself, that the average citizen will have any power overthe railway. Let us revert, for a moment, to what Messrs Berleand Means say about ownership and control in large Americancorporations. They point out that, in the majority of such corporations,all the directors together usually own only about oneor two percent of the stock, and yet, in effect, have completecontrol:the taming of power 235In the election of the board the stock holder ordinarily has threealternatives. He can refrain from voting, he can attend theannual meeting and personally vote his stock, or he can sign aproxy transferring his voting power to certain individualsselected by the management of the corporation, the proxycommittee. As his personal vote will count for little or nothingat the meeting unless he has a very large block of stock, thestock holder is practically reduced to the alternative of not votingat all or else of handing over his vote to individuals over whomhe has no control and in whose selection he did not participate. Inneither case will he be able to exercise any measure of control.Rather, control will tend to be in the hands of those who selectthe proxy committee . . . Since the proxy committee isappointed by the existing management, the latter can virtuallydictate their own successors.1The helpless individuals described in the above passage are, itshould be noted, not proletarians, but capitalists. They are partowners of the corporation concerned, in the sense that they havelegal rights which may, with luck, bring them in a certainincome; but owing to their lack of control, the income is veryprecarious. When I first visited the United States in 1896, I wasstruck by the enormous number of railways that were bankrupt;on inquiry, I found that this was not due to incompetence on thepart of the directors, but to skill: the investments of ordinaryshareholders had been transferred, by one device or another, toother companies in which the directors had a large interest. Thiswas a crude method, and nowadays matters are usually managedin a more decorous fashion, but the principle remains the same.In any large corporation, power is necessarily less diffused thanownership, and carries with it advantages which, though at firstpolitical, can be made sources of wealth to an indefinite extent.1 Op. cit., pp. 86–7.236 the taming of powerThe humble investor can be politely and legally robbed; the onlylimit is that he must not have such bitter experiences as to leadhim to keep his future savings in a stocking.The situation is in no way essentially different when the Statetakes the place of a corporation; indeed, since it is the size of thecorporation that causes the helplessness of the average shareholder,the average citizen is likely to be still more helpless asagainst the State. A battleship is public property, but if, on thisground, you try to exercise rights of ownership, you will besoon put in your place. You have a remedy, it is true: at the nextGeneral Election, you can vote for a candidate who favours areduction in the Navy Estimates, if you can find one; or you canwrite to the papers to urge that sailors should be more polite tosightseers. But more than this you cannot do.But, it is said, the battleship belongs to a capitalist State, andwhen it belongs to a workers’ State everything will be different.This view seems to me to show a failure to grasp the fact thateconomic power is now a matter of government rather thanownership. If the United States Steel Corporation, say, were takenover by the United States Government, it would still need men tomanage it; they would either be the same men who now manageit, or men with similar abilities and a similar outlook. The attitudewhich they now have towards the shareholders they wouldthen have towards the citizens. True, they would be subject to thegovernment, but unless it was democratic and responsible topublic opinion, it would have a point of view closely similar tothat of the officials.Marxists, having retained, as a result of the authority of Marxand Engels, many ways of thinking that belong to the forties oflast century, still conceive of businesses as if they belonged toindividual capitalists, and have not learnt the lessons to be derivedfrom the separation of ownership and control. The importantperson is the man who has control of economic power, not theman who has a fraction of the nominal ownership. The Primethe taming of power 237Minister does not own No 10 Downing Street, and Bishops do notown their palaces; but it would be absurd to pretend, on thisaccount, that they are no better off as regards housing than theaverage wage-earner. Under any form of socialism which is notdemocratic, those who control economic power can, without‘owning’ anything, have palatial official residences, the use of thebest cars, a princely entertainment allowance, holidays at the publicexpense in official holiday resorts, and so on and so on. Andwhy should they have any more concern for the ordinary workerthan those in control have now? There can be no reason why theyshould have, unless the ordinary worker has power to deprivethem of their positions. Moreover the subordination of the smallinvestor in existing large corporations shows how easy it is for theofficial to overpower the democracy, even when the ‘democracy’consists of capitalists.Not only, therefore, is democracy essential if State ownershipand control of economic enterprises is to be in any degreeadvantageous to the average citizen, but it will have to be aneffective democracy, and this will be more difficult to securethan it is at present, since the official class will, unless verycarefully supervised, combine the powers at present possessedby the government and the men in control of industry andfinance, and since the means of agitating against the governmentwill have to be supplied by the government itself, as the soleowner of halls, paper, and all the other essentials of propaganda.While, therefore, public ownership and control of all largescaleindustry and finance is a necessary condition for the tamingof power, it is far from being a sufficient condition. It needs to besupplemented by a democracy more thorough-going, morecarefully safeguarded against official tyranny, and with moredeliberate provision for freedom of propaganda, than any purelypolitical democracy that has ever existed.The dangers of State Socialism divorced from democracyhave been illustrated by the course of events in the USSR.238 the taming of powerThere are those whose attitude to Russia is one of religiousfaith; to them, it is impious even to examine the evidence thatall is not well in that country. But the testimony of formerenthusiasts is becoming more and more convincing to thosewhose minds are open to reason on the subject. The argumentsfrom history and psychology with which we have beenconcerned in previous chapters have shown how rash it is toexpect irresponsible power to be benevolent. What actuallyhappens, as regards power, is summed up by Eugene Lyons inthe following words:Absolutism at the top implies hundred of thousands, even millions,of large and small autocrats in a state that monopolisesall means of life and expression, work and pleasure, rewardsand punishments. A centralised autocratic rule must functionthrough a human machine of delegated authority, a pyramid ofgraded officialdom, each layer subservient to those above andoverbearing to those below. Unless there are brakes of genuinelydemocratic control and the corrective of a hard-and-fastlegality to which everyone, even the anointed of the Lord, issubjected the machine of power becomes an engine of oppression.Where there is only one employer, namely, the State,meekness is the first law of economic survival. Where the samegroup of officials wields the terrible power of secret arrests andpunishments, disfranchisement, hiring and firing, assignmentof ration categories and living space—only an imbecile orsomeone with a perverted taste for martyrdom will fail to kowtowto them.2If concentration of power in a single organisation—the State—is not to produce the evils of despotism in an extreme form, it isessential that power within that organisation should be widely2 Assignment in Utopia, p. 195.the taming of power 239distributed, and that subordinate groups should have a largemeasure of autonomy. Without democracy, devolution, andimmunity from extra-legal punishment, the coalescence of economicand political power is nothing but a new and appallinginstrument of tyranny. In Russia, a peasant on a collective farmwho takes any portion of the grain that he has himself grown isliable to the death penalty. This law was made at a time whenmillions of peasants were dying of hunger and attendant diseases,owing to the famine which the government deliberatelyrefrained from alleviating.3IIII come now to the propaganda conditions for the taming ofpower. It is obvious that publicity for grievances must be possible;agitation must be free provided it does not incite tobreaches of the law; there must be ways of impeaching officialswho exceed or abuse their powers. The government of the daymust not be in a position to secure its own permanence byintimidation, falsification of the register of electors, or any similarmethod. There must be no penalty, official or unofficial, forany well-grounded criticism of prominent men. Much of this, atpresent, is secured by party government in democratic countries,which causes the politicians in power to be objects of hostilecriticism by nearly half the nation. This makes it impossible forthem to commit many crimes to which they might otherwise beprone.All this is more important when the State has a monopoly ofeconomic power than it is under capitalism, since the powerof the State will be vastly augmented. Take a concrete case: that ofwomen employed in the public service. At present they have agrievance, because their rates of pay are lower than those of men;3 Ibid., p. 492.240 the taming of powerthey have legitimate ways of making their grievance known, andit would not be safe to penalise them for making use of theseways. There is no reason whatever for supposing that the presentinequality would necessarily cease with the adoption of Socialism,but the means of agitating about it would cease, unlessexpress provision were made for just such cases. Newspapers andprinting presses would all belong to the government, and wouldprint only what the government ordered. Can it be assumed ascertain that the government would print attacks on its own policy?If not, there would be no means of political agitation bymeans of print. Public meetings would be just as difficult, sincethe halls would all belong to the government. Consequently,unless careful provision were made for the express purpose ofsafeguarding political liberty, no method would exist of makinggrievances known, and the government, when once elected,would be as omnipotent as Hitler, and could easily arrange for itsown re-election to the end of time. Democracy might surviveas a form, but would have no more reality than the forms ofpopular government that lingered on under the Roman Empire.To suppose that irresponsible power, just because it is calledSocialist or Communist, will be freed miraculously from the badqualities of all arbitrary power in the past, is mere childish nurserypsychology: the wicked prince is ousted by the goodprince, and all is well. If a prince is to be trusted, it must be notbecause he is ‘good’, but because it is against his interest to be‘bad’. To insure that this shall be the case is to make powerinnocuous; but it cannot be rendered innocuous by transformingmen whom we believe to be ‘good’ into irresponsibledespots.The  is a State institution which shows what is possible inthe way of combining freedom of propaganda with governmentmonopoly. At such a time as that of the General Strike, it must beadmitted, it ceases to be impartial; but at ordinary times it representsdifferent points of view, as nearly as may be, in proportionthe taming of power 241to their numerical strength. In a Socialist State, similar arrangementsfor impartiality would have to be made in regard to thehiring of halls for meetings and the printing of controversialliterature. It might be found desirable, instead of having differentnewspapers representing different points of view, to have onlyone, with different pages allocated to different parties. Thiswould have the advantage that readers would see all opinions,and would tend to be less one-sided than those who, at present,never see in a newspaper anything with which they disagree.There are certain regions, such as art and science, and (so faras public order allows) party politics, where uniformity is notnecessary or even desirable. These are the legitimate sphere ofcompetition, and it is important that public feeling should besuch as to bear differences on such matters without exasperation.Democracy, if it is to succeed and endure, demands atolerant spirit, not too much hate, and not too much love ofviolence. But this brings us to the psychological conditions forthe taming of power.IVThe psychological conditions for the taming of power are insome ways the most difficult. In connection with the psychologyof power we saw that fear, rage, and all kinds of violent collectiveexcitement, tend to make men blindly follow a leader, who, inmost cases, takes advantage of their trust to establish himself as atyrant. It is therefore important, if democracy is to be preserved,both to avoid the circumstances that produce general excitement,and to educate in such a way that the population shall belittle prone to moods of this sort. Where a spirit of ferociousdogmatism prevails, any opinion with which men disagree isliable to provoke a breach of the peace. Schoolboys are apt toill-treat a boy whose opinions are in any way odd, and manygrown men have not got beyond the mental age of schoolboys. A242 the taming of powerdiffused liberal sentiment, tinged with scepticism, makes socialcooperation much less difficult, and liberty correspondinglymore possible.Revivalist enthusiasm, such as that of the Nazis, rouses admirationin many through the energy and apparent self-abnegationthat it generates. Collective excitement, involving indifference topain and even to death, is historically not uncommon. Where itexists, liberty is impossible. The enthusiasts can only berestrained by force, and if they are not restrained they will useforce against others. I remember a Bolshevik whom I met inPeking in 1920, who marched up and down the room exclaimingwith complete truth: ‘If vee do not keel zem, zey vill keel us!’The existence of this mood on one side of course generates thesame mood on the other side; the consequence is a fight to afinish, in which everything is subordinated to victory. Duringthe fight, the government acquires despotic power for militaryreasons; at the end, if victorious, it uses its power first to crushwhat remains of the enemy, and then to secure the continuanceof its dictatorship over its own supporters. The result is somethingquite different from what was fought for by the enthusiasts.Enthusiasm, while it can achieve certain results, can hardlyever achieve those that it desires. To admire collective enthusiasmis reckless and irresponsible, for its fruits are fierceness, war,death, and slavery.War is the chief promoter of despotism, and the greatest obstacleto the establishment of a system in which irresponsiblepower is avoided as far as possible. The prevention of war istherefore an essential part of our problem—I should say, the mostessential I believe that, if once the world were freed from the fearof war, under no matter what form of government or what economicsystem, it would in time find ways of curbing the ferocityof its rulers. On the other hand, all war, but especially modernwar, promotes dictatorship by causing the timid to seek a leaderand by converting the bolder spirits from a society into a pack.the taming of power 243The risk of war causes a certain kind of mass psychology, andreciprocally this kind, where it exists, increases the risk of war, aswell as the likelihood of despotism. We have therefore to considerthe kind of education which will make societies least proneto collective hysteria, and most capable of successfully practisingdemocracy.Democracy, if it is to succeed, needs a wide diffusion of twoqualities which seem, at first sight, to tend in opposite directions.On the one hand, men must have a certain degree of selfrelianceand a certain willingness to back their own judgement;there must be political propaganda in opposite directions, inwhich many people take part. But on the other hand, men mustbe willing to submit to the decision of the majority when it goesagainst them. Either of these conditions may fail: the populationmay be too submissive, and may follow a vigorous leader intodictatorship; or each party may be too self-assertive, with theresult that the nation falls into anarchy.What education has to do in this matter may be consideredunder two heads: first, in relation to character and the emotions;secondly, in relation to instruction. Let us begin with the former.If democracy is to be workable, the population must be as faras possible free from hatred and destructiveness, and also fromfear and subservience. These feelings may be caused by politicalor economic circumstances, but what I want to consider is thepart that education plays in making men more or less prone tothem.Some parents and some schools begin with the attempt toteach children complete obedience, an attempt which is almostbound to produce either a slave or a rebel, neither of which iswhat is wanted in a democracy. As to the effects of a severelydisciplinary education, the view that I hold is held by all thedictators of Europe. After the war, almost all the countries ofEurope had a number of free schools, without too much disciplineor too much show of respect for the teachers; but one by244 the taming of powerone the military autocracies, including the Soviet Republic, havesuppressed all freedom in schools and have gone back to the olddrill, and to the practice of treating the teacher as a miniatureFührer or Duce. The dictators, we may infer, all regard a certaindegree of freedom in school as the proper training fordemocracy, and autocracy in school is the natural prelude toautocracy in the State.Every man and woman in a democracy should be neither aslave nor a rebel, but a citizen, that is, a person who has, andallows to others, a due proportion, but no more, of the governmentmentality. Where democracy does not exist, the governmentalmentality is that of masters towards dependants; butwhere there is democracy it is that of equal cooperation, whichinvolves the assertion of one’s own opinion up to a certainpoint, but no further.This brings us to a source of trouble to many democrats,namely what is called ‘principle’. Most talk about principle, selfsacrifice,heroic devotion to a cause, and so on, should bescanned somewhat sceptically. A little psycho-analysis will oftenshow that what goes by these fine names is really somethingquite different, such as pride, or hatred, or desire for revenge,that has become idealised and collectivised and personified as anoble form of idealism. The warlike patriot, who is willing andeven anxious to fight for his country, may reasonably be suspectedof a certain pleasure in killing. A kindly population, apopulation who in their childhood had received kindness andbeen made happy, and who in youth had found the world afriendly place, would not develop that particular sort of idealismcalled patriotism, or class-war, or what not, which consists injoining together to kill people in large numbers. I think thetendency to cruel forms of idealism is increased by unhappinessin childhood, and would be lessened if early education wereemotionally what it ought to be. Fanaticism is a defect which ispartly emotional, partly intellectual; it needs to be combated bythe taming of power 245the kind of happiness that makes men kindly, and the kind ofintelligence that produces a scientific habit of mind.The temper required to make a success of democracy is, in thepractical life, exactly what the scientific temper is in the intellectuallife; it is a half-way house between scepticism and dogmatism.Truth, it holds, is neither completely attainable norcompletely unattainable; it is attainable to a certain degree, andthat only with difficulty.Autocracy, in its modem forms, is always combined with acreed: that of Hitler, that of Mussolini, or that of Stalin. Whereverthere is autocracy, a set of beliefs is instilled into theminds of the young before they are capable of thinking, andthese beliefs are taught so constantly and so persistently that itis hoped the pupils will never afterwards be able to escapefrom the hypnotic effect of their early lessons. The beliefs areinstilled, not by giving any reason for supposing them true, butby parrot-like repetition, by mass hysteria and mass suggestion.When two opposite creeds have been taught in this fashion,they produce two armies which clash, not two parties that candiscuss. Each hypnotised automaton feels that everything mostsacred is bound up with the victory of his side, everythingmost horrible is exemplified by the other side. Such fanaticalfactions cannot meet in Parliament and say ‘let us see whichside has the majority’; that would be altogether too pedestrian,since each side stands for a sacred cause. This sort of dogmatismmust be prevented if dictatorships are to be avoided, andmeasures for preventing it ought to form an essential part ofeducation.If I had control of education, I should expose children to themost vehement and eloquent advocates on all sides of everytopical question, who should speak to the schools from the .The teacher should afterwards invite the children to summarisethe arguments used, and should gently insinuate the view thateloquence is inversely proportional to solid reason. To acquire246 the taming of powerimmunity to eloquence is of the utmost importance to thecitizens of a democracy.Modern propagandists have learnt from advertisers, who ledthe way in the technique of producing irrational belief. Educationshould be designed to counteract the natural credulity andthe natural incredulity of the uneducated: the habit of believingan emphatic statement without reasons, and of disbelieving anunemphatic statement even when accompanied by the best ofreasons. I should begin in the infant school, with two classes ofsweets between which the children should choose: one verynice, recommended by a coldly accurate statement as to itsingredients; the other very nasty, recommended by the utmostskill of the best advertisers. A little later I should give them achoice of two places for a country holiday: a nice place recommendedby a contour map, and an ugly place recommended bymagnificent posters.The teaching of history ought to be conducted in a similarspirit. There have been in the past eminent orators and writerswho defended, with an appearance of great wisdom, positionswhich no one now holds: the reality of witchcraft, the beneficenceof slavery, and so on. I should cause the young to knowsuch masters of eloquence, and to appreciate at once their rhetoricand their wrong-headedness. Gradually I should pass on tocurrent questions. As a sort of bonne bouche to their history, Ishould read to them what is said about Spain (or whatever at themoment is most controversial) first by the Daily Mail, and then bythe Daily Worker; and I should then ask them to infer what reallyhappened. For undoubtedly few things are more useful to acitizen of a democracy than skill in detecting, by reading newspapers,what it was that took place. For this purpose, it would beinstructive to compare the newspapers at crucial moments duringthe Great War with what subsequently appeared in theofficial history. And when the madness of war hysteria, as shownin the newspapers of the time, strikes your pupils as incredible,the taming of power 247you should warn them that all of them, unless they are verycareful to cultivate a balanced and cautious judgement, mayfall overnight into a similar madness at the first touch ofgovernment incitement to terror and blood lust.I do not wish, however, to preach a purely negative emotionalattitude; I am not suggesting that all strong feeling should besubjected to destructive analysis. I am advocating this attitudeonly in relation to those emotions which are the basis of collectivehysteria, for it is collective hysteria that facilitates wars anddictatorships. But wisdom is not merely intellectual: intellect mayguide and direct, but does not generate the force that leads toaction. The force must be derived from the emotions. Emotionsthat have desirable social consequences are not so easily generatedas hate and rage and fear. In their creation, much dependsupon early childhood; much, also, upon economic circumstances,Something, however, can be done, in the course ofordinary education, to provide the nourishment upon which thebetter emotions can grow, and to bring about the realisation ofwhat may give value to human life.This has been, in the past, one of the purposes of religion. TheChurches, however, have also had other purposes, and theirdogmatic basis causes difficulties. For those to whom traditionalreligion is no longer possible, there are other ways. Some findwhat they need in music, some in poetry. For some others,astronomy serves the same purpose. When we reflect upon thesize and antiquity of the stellar universe, the controversies onthis rather insignificant planet lose some of their importance,and the acerbity of our disputes seems a trifle ridiculous. Andwhen we are liberated by this negative emotion, we are able torealise more fully, through music or poetry, through history orscience, through beauty or through pain, that the really valuablethings in human life are individual, not such things as happenon a battlefield or in the clash of politics or in the regimentedmarch of masses of men towards an externally imposed goal.248 the taming of powerThe organised life of the community is necessary, but it is necessaryas mechanism, not something to be valued on its ownaccount. What is of most value in human life is more analogousto what all the great religious teachers have spoken of. Thosewho believe in the Corporate State maintain that our highestactivities are collective, whereas I should maintain that we allreach our best in different ways, and that the emotional unity ofa crowd can only be achieved on a lower level.This is the essential difference between the liberal outlook andthat of the totalitarian State, that the former regards the welfareof the State as residing ultimately in the welfare of the individual,while the latter regards the State as the end and individualsmerely as indispensable ingredients, whose welfare must besubordinated to a mystical totality which is a cloak for the interestof the rulers. Ancient Rome had something of the doctrine ofState-worship, but Christianity fought the Emperors and ultimatelywon. Liberalism, in valuing the individual, is carrying onthe Christian tradition; its opponents are reviving certain pre-Christian doctrines. From the first, the idolators of the State haveregarded education as the key to success. This appears, forexample, in Fichte’s Addresses to the German Nation, which deals atlength with education. What Fichte desires is set forth in thefollowing passage:If any one were to say: ‘How could any one demand more ofan education than that it should show the pupil the right andstrongly recommend it to him; whether he follows theserecommendations is his own affair, and if he does not do it, hisown fault; he has free will, which no education can take fromhim’: I should answer, in order to characterise more sharplythe education I contemplate, that just in this recognition of andcounting on the free will of the pupil lies the first error of educationhitherto and the distinct acknowledgement of its impotenceand emptiness. For inasmuch as it admits that, after allthe taming of power 249its strongest operation, the will remains free, that is oscillatingundecidedly between good and bad, it admits that it neithercan nor wishes to mould the will, or, since will is the essentialroot of man, man himself; and that it holds this to be altogetherimpossible. The new education, on the contrary, would have toconsist in a complete annihilation of the freedom of the will inthe territory that it undertook to deal with.His reason for desiring to create ‘good’ men is not that theyare in themselves better than ‘bad’ men; his reason is that ‘onlyin such (good men) can the German nation persist, but throughbad men it will necessarily coalesce with foreign countries’.All this may be taken as expressing the exact antithesis of whatthe liberal educator will wish to achieve. So far from ‘annihilatingthe freedom of the will’, he will aim at strengthening individualjudgement; he will instil what he can of the scientificattitude towards the pursuit of knowledge; he will try to makebeliefs tentative and responsive to evidence; he will not posebefore his pupils as omniscient, nor will he yield to the love ofpower on the pretence that he is pursuing some absolute good.Love of power is the chief danger of the educator, as of thepolitician; the man who can be trusted in education must carefor his pupils on their own account, not merely as potentialsoldiers in an army of propagandists for a cause. Fichte and thepowerful men who have inherited his ideals, when they seechildren, think: ‘Here is material that I can manipulate, that I canteach to behave like a machine in furtherance of my purposes;for the moment I may be impeded by joy of life, spontaneity, theimpulse to play, the desire to live for purposes springing fromwithin, not imposed from without; but all this, after the years ofschooling that I shall impose, will be dead; fancy, imagination,art, and the power of thought shall have been destroyed byobedience; the death of joy will have bred receptiveness to fanaticism;and in the end I shall find my human material as passive250 the taming of poweras stone from a quarry or coal from a mine. In the battles towhich I shall lead them, some will die, some will live; those whodie will die exultantly, as heroes, those who live will live on asmy slaves, with that deep mental slavery to which my schoolswill have accustomed them.’ All this, to any person with naturalaffection for the young, is horrible; just as we teach children toavoid being destroyed by motor cars if they can, so we shouldteach them to avoid being destroyed by cruel fanatics, and to thisend we should seek to produce independence of mind, somewhatsceptical and wholly scientific, and to preserve, as far aspossible, the instinctive joy of life that is natural to healthy children.This is the task of a liberal education: to give a sense of thevalue of things other than domination, to help to create wisecitizens of a free community, and through the combination ofcitizenship with liberty in individual creativeness to enable mento give to human life that splendour which some few haveshown that it can achieve.the taming of power 251